# 404 : Page Not Found

This page was lost in a boating accident and no one can prove that it wasn’t.

Seriously though, we don’t know what page you’re looking for or how you got here. If it seems like a bug, please let us know. Otherwise, the [Monero Outreach homepage](https://www.monerooutreach.org/) would be a good place to get back on track.

### _The Boating Accident : Monero’s Inside Joke_

In December 2017, Riccardo ‘fluffypony’ Spagni, then the lead-maintainer for Monero, tweeted that he had lost all his XMR in a boating accident. [twitter.com/fluffypony/status/943493541182963712](https://twitter.com/fluffypony/status/943493541182963712). Fluffy’s boating accident became a popular meme and inside joke around the Monero community.

The truth behind this fun is the idea that if you claimed to have lost your gold in a boating accident, it would be hard to prove otherwise. Valuable metals are fungible and private. Coins and jewelry get melted into bars and vice-versa while preserving the commodity value. XMR shares those traits. If you said that you lost all your XMR in a boating accident, it won’t be the Monero blockchain that betrays you.

### _Error Page Exclusive Interview : fluffypony_

Yes, our 404 page features an interview with [@fluffypony](https://twitter.com/fluffypony). He generously spoke with us on July 22, 2020.

**Monero users like the boating accident myth. You were seemingly joking, but has anyone ever taken it too seriously?**

_fluffypony:_ Most famous is the lead developer of Verge. He said something like, “the lead developer of Monero is so careless with his keys...” He legitimately accepted that it was real. Part of the mythology of course is, was it real or not? I’ll add that, like many, I have lost access to private keys, especially early on and especially with experimental things.

**What amount of all Monero ever mined would you estimate is lost?**

_fluffypony:_ That is a tough one. I would say Monero came around when people in the cryptocurrency ecosystem were more experienced, so losses are not as bad as with Bitcoin. But Monero was new and different enough that some people were careless. I would not be surprised if a few hundred thousand to a million have been lost.

**What primary recommendation would you make to users keep their Monero safe?**

_fluffypony:_ People need to think carefuly about separating their funds. What I mean by that is that if you have Monero to spend, you keep that part separate like cash in your pocket wallet. Well under $1,000 is what you are willing to lose, and if someone points a gun at you, you can value your life and turn it over. If you have a 401(k) or retirement fund, though, you don’t carry the keys to that around in your pocket. Instead, your bank has 2FA. Yet some people break this rule and leave leave large Monero amounts on an exchange, which is problematic, or in a hot wallet. Everyone should think, this is what I’m willing to lose, and separate that from the rest.

**Do you have any special advice for users of Monero paper wallets?**

_fluffypony:_ Step 1, don’t go boating with them. Seriously, paper wallets are good, an interesting alternative to hardware wallets. Write the keys down, don’t print them out, because printers have memory. It’s not difficult to write them down. There are lots of interesting things you can do with a paper wallet. Keep half of the seed in one place and half in another. You can even duplicate parts of the seed. Then anyone who gains access to just one set of the seed words cannot crack the wallet. This approach is easy to think through and understand--they are just words. Also, it’s kind of cool how you can obfuscate the seed. Imagine writing a poem where the first word of each line is a seed word, then if anyone finds that poem it will be discarded as only a poem.

**What is something no one has ever asked about the boating incident?**

_fluffypony:_ Who else was on the boat? It’s assumed solo, but others may have lost keys, too.
