# Monero Atomic Swaps

**“With atomic swaps, users trade cryptocurrencies with no need to trust each other or anyone else.” - 15th of April, 2021**

Better Monero trading is coming, thanks to atomic swaps. With atomic swaps, online users trade cryptocurrencies without needing to trust each other or anyone else. Monero atomic swaps are made possible by new technologies and concepts and are being implemented by multiple teams, including a community funded software project called Farcaster and an algorithmically similar effort by the COMIT team.

This article covers both the underlying technologies and the software efforts, with a focus on Farcaster. Background technologies for both traditional atomic swaps with Bitcoin-like cryptocurrencies and new atomic swaps with Monero are presented, as well as the steps required for both types of swaps. Benefits and shortcomings of the new techniques are discussed, illustrating the potential for and nature of transformative change that will help both Bitcoin and Monero.

### _Atomic Swaps Background_

In an atomic swap, users exchange different cryptocurrencies with the outcome enforced only by the blockchain and user self-interest. When done correctly, an atomic swap either I) succeeds with cryptocurrencies being swapped, or II) fails with participants keeping their original cryptocurrencies. The “atomic” part of it dictates that the process cannot be split—it either happens completely or not at all.

Because Monero atomic swaps involve other cryptocurrencies, it is necessary to venture into those other cryptocurrencies’ technologies. Not every cryptocurrency supports Monero atomic swaps, and the focus here is on Bitcoin, though the approach works with other Bitcoin-like cryptocurrencies that have the malleability fix that was part of Segregated Witnesses (SegWit), like Litecoin.

Some technical background: A cryptographic hash converts any data into a concise string or number (256 bits is a typical example) in an irreversible way. It is easy to calculate this function for any original data, called the preimage. But given a hash result, there is no good way to find a preimage that generates it.

Hashing enables hashlocks. A hashlock on cryptocurrency prevents spending until the preimage for the specified (on-blockchain) hash is provided. Similar is the timelock, which prevents spending until a certain time. Bitcoin has a scripting language that can put either of these into a transaction (the name for the on-blockchain data bundle that spends cryptocurrency) and mix them with other logic. Combining a hashlock and a timelock gives what is called a Hashed Timelock Contract (HTLC), where cryptocurrency goes to one recipient if a preimage is provided before a specified deadline and otherwise goes to a different recipient after that deadline.

### _Atomic Swaps for Two Bitcoin-Like Cryptocurrencies_

The first atomic swap traded Decred and Litecoin on September 20, 2017 (with a Bitcoin-Litecoin atomic swap coming just three days later) [[1]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b1). The method used for these Bitcoin-like cryptocurrencies is simpler, and worth understanding before delving into the more complicated Monero case.

Here are the steps if you have Bitcoin and want to atomic swap it for Litecoin from an online stranger:

1. You and the stranger exchange information on cryptocurrency amounts and addresses.
2. You put your Bitcoin in an HTLC published on the Bitcoin blockchain using the stranger’s public key. It can be claimed by the stranger by providing the preimage (generated by and initially known only to you) for the hash before a certain final deadline. Using the stranger’s public key ensures it can only be claimed by the stranger through the preimage. If unclaimed after the final deadline, the Bitcoin returns to you.
3. The stranger puts Litecoin in an HTLC published on the Litecoin blockchain using your public key and the same exact hash value you used for your Bitcoin in step 2, but this HTLC times out after a shorter intermediate deadline. If unclaimed after the intermediate deadline the Litecoin returns to the stranger.
4. You, with sole knowledge of the preimage that generated the two identical hashes, claim the Litecoin by disclosing the preimage.
5. The stranger uses the preimage you just disclosed to claim the Bitcoin.

Addresses and amounts are public, published on the blockchain, letting you and the stranger be sure you will not be cheated when you post and claim your cryptocurrency. With this process, if all goes well you get the Litecoin and the stranger gets the Bitcoin. If the Litecoin is unclaimed, all original amounts are returned to the original owners. If the Litecoin is claimed but the Bitcoin remains unclaimed by the stranger after the final deadline, you get it, too, motivating the stranger to claim it on time.

### _Foundation for Monero Atomic Swaps_

The above process cannot swap Monero because Monero does not have HTLCs (it does not have either hashlocks or timelocks). But there is still a way.

Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Monero use digital signatures, a blanket term that includes the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) method used by Bitcoin, the Schnorr algorithm proposed for Bitcoin’s future Taproot upgrade, and the Concise Linkable Spontaneous Anonymous Group (CLSAG) signature method used by Monero. These all rely on scalar multiplication over a special mathematical construct called an elliptic curve. This multiplication is a one-way function that is easy to calculate, but transcendently hard to reverse through division (a process called calculating the discrete logarithm). These elliptic-curve-based functions are different from the one-way hash function discussed earlier by having important mathematical properties.

When using one of these digital signature algorithms, a private key corresponds to a secret random number that is multiplied by a known base value on an elliptic curve to get the public key. Elliptic-curve-based signature methods let the owner of a private key share the matching public key then later provide a digital signature for any data to prove 1) agreement with the data and 2) knowledge of the private key. This process can be repeated over and over, except in specially designed cases. Digital signatures are illustrated in the figure below.

**Figure 1 - Digital Signature**

One of the special cases without repetition is called an adaptor signature, and it is used for Monero atomic swaps. Encryption can use public and private keys just like signatures—with a public key encrypting, and a private key decrypting. An adaptor signature, then, is based on technology called Verifiably Encrypted Signatures (VES), which allows a signature to be encrypted with the ability by anyone to verify using the public keys (two of them: one for the signature method and one for the encryption method) that the encrypted signature is legitimate without actually learning the (unencrypted) signature. This further enables adaptor signatures, also called one-time VES, with the following property: with an adaptor signature as the encrypted signature, the private key used for encryption (called the adaptor key) can be calculated from the encrypted signature and unencrypted signature together. If you give an adaptor signature—made, for example, for Bitcoin’s ECDSA signature method—to a stranger, then later disclose the unencrypted signature—such as by signing a Bitcoin transaction—the stranger can calculate the adaptor key. This is illustrated in the figure below.

**Figure 2 - Adaptor Signature**

For use with atomic swaps, though, a Monero private key will need to be calculated from a Bitcoin signature, yet Monero and Bitcoin use different elliptic curves. Monero atomic swaps require a way to prove a common divisor (the discrete logarithm corresponding to the private key) for two values on the two different Elliptic curves. These proofs are called zero-knowledge proofs because they do not disclose information about the value of the discrete logarithm, just that it is the same. The particular zero-knowledge-proof approach used for Monero atomic swaps is given in [[2]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b2). This type of zero-knowledge proof is illustrated in the figure below.

**Figure 3 - Zero-Knowledge Proof**

When combined with an (ECDSA or Schnorr) adaptor signature defined using Bitcoin’s elliptic curve, a zero-knowledge proof of a discrete logarithm enables calculation of Monero private key data from a Bitcoin signature in a process that can be guaranteed to work in advance. This combination of adaptor signatures with zero-knowledge proof of a common discrete logarithm across Bitcoin’s and Monero’s Elliptic curves was the breakthrough that made Monero-Bitcoin atomic swaps possible [[3]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b3).

For atomic swaps, though, the adaptor signature is used to disclose only part of a Monero key—a special part. Key splitting is where a secret key, K, is split into (for purposes here) two parts called key shares, A and B, in such a way that A or B alone gives no insight into K’s value but A and B together allow easy calculation of K. For use in Monero atomic swaps, K is calculated from A and B through modular addition, which gives special needed mathematical properties. In particular, it lets an adaptor signature disclose a private key share for a known public key.

Signatures are used in Bitcoin transactions to spend Bitcoin. A spender’s private keys are used to sign essential parts of transactions to move control of Bitcoin to new private keys (corresponding to new public keys or addresses). In this, Bitcoin allows what are called multisig transactions where more than one signature is needed to spend Bitcoin. Bitcoin multisig transactions can be of the M-of-N type where M≤N. In particular, for atomic swaps, 2-of-2 multisig transactions are used. Bitcoin multisig and Monero private key splitting, as discussed in the paragraph above, are related tools with similar effect for the two cryptocurrencies.

The final background technology is scriptless scripts. The atomic swap method for two Bitcoin-like cryptocurrencies discussed earlier used the scripting language built into the cryptocurrencies to program HTLCs. The idea behind a scriptless script is that if you want action B to follow action A, instead of an explicit program, cryptography is applied so that action A reveals information that enables action B, with someone financially motivated to perform B. This technique was used in part in the earlier (Litecoin-Bitcoin) atomic swap example by making your claiming the Litecoin disclose information that enabled and motivated the stranger to claim the Bitcoin before the final deadline. A process like this combining scripting with scriptless scripts is called a semi-scriptless protocol.

### _Monero Atomic Swaps Concept_

The above tools are used in a semi-scriptless protocol for Monero atomic swaps developed by Joël Gugger [[4]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b4). The approach is to use crytographic techniques to ensure that when the stranger claims the Bitcoin you contributed to the swap, this automatically discloses information that lets you and only you get the Monero that the stranger posted. This core component is executed by you and the stranger each creating a secret key share for a Monero private spend key that controls the Monero that is posted by the stranger. You post your Bitcoin for swapping as a Bitcoin script using an adaptor signature with a zero-knowledge proof to force disclosure of the stranger’s secret key share if the stranger claims the Bitcoin.

That core part is straightforward. But it needs extra structure to complete an atomic swap because every way for the trade to go wrong has to let you and the stranger recover. This is the challenging part. Here are some ways it can go wrong after you commit Bitcoin through the script described in the previous paragraph: 1) you could have posted the wrong amount of Bitcoin, 2) the stranger could post the wrong amount of Monero (or none at all), or 3) the stranger could never claim the Bitcoin. Each of these needs protection.

As a response to way 1) the exchange could go wrong, by you posting the wrong amount of Bitcoin, the stranger can monitor the transparent Bitcoin blockchain and simply not post Monero if your posting amount is wrong. But this requires a way for you to get your Bitcoin back, which is accomplished using a Bitcoin script called a refund script. This script transfers the Bitcoin to you with an adaptor signature with a zero-knowledge proof forcing disclosure of your Monero private key share when you claim it, allowing the stranger to then claim any Monero that happens to have been posted (which will be necessary later in this discussion). This transaction is held by you and the stranger (unposted to the blockchain) for use only if needed. With it at the ready, if you post the wrong amount of Bitcoin, the stranger does not post Monero and you eventually post the refund script to the Bitcoin blockchain and get your Bitcoin back.

As a response to way 2) the exchange could go wrong, by the stranger posting the wrong amount of Monero, this situation must be made visible by sharing up-front the Monero view key for the posted amount. Further, in preparation for this problem, your Bitcoin is posted using a Bitcoin script, called the swaplock script, that uses a 2-of-2 multisig method to allow the stranger to claim the Bitcoin only after you provide a signature using a private key known only to you and otherwise uses a timelock script to send the Bitcoin to the refund script described above after a deadline agreed on ahead of time called (for purposes here) the normal-completion deadline. This script makes it so that you have to approve the Monero amount before disclosing the signature that allows the stranger to claim the Bitcoin. With this in place, if the wrong amount (or zero) Monero is observed using the view key, you can just wait for the time out of the swaplock script to get your Bitcoin back via the refund script described in the previous paragraph. Care must be taken to ensure that the stranger gets the Monero back in this case, and for this the adaptor signature with a zero-knowledge proof mentioned in the previous paragraph conveys your secret share of the Monero private key when you claim the Bitcoin, allowing the stranger to get the posted Monero back.

It is worth noting here that the original paper by Gugger used a hashlock script with a preimage controlled by you to manage the ability of the stranger to claim the Bitcoin, and this was the original plan by the Farcaster team, which can still be seen in some documents online. During development, it was pointed out by the COMIT team that this hashlock was not required because a 2-of-2 multisig method could serve the same role with one of the two signatures controlled and provided by you (in particular, the signature in the 2-of-2 multisig for the swaplock script that is not associated with the adaptor signature). This updated approach is described here and can be further investigated in the Farcaster Requests For Comment (RFCs) [[5]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b5).

As a response to way 3) the exchange could go wrong, by the stranger never claiming the Bitcoin, this case is handled by the swaplock script described above, which enables you to use the refund script to reclaim the Bitcoin after the normal-completion deadline.

With this, the initial three listed ways the core atomic swap could go wrong are addressed. But now there are new ways the swap could go wrong. The above process has opened two new possibilities for failure: 1) you could fail to give a signature for the 2-of-2 multisig after the Monero is posted, or 2) you or the stranger could post the refund script to the Bitcoin blockchain but you fail to claim the Bitcoin. Both cases involve waiting for the swaplock script to trigger funding of the refund script. Then the first case is addressed by the stranger posting the refund script and waiting on you to reclaim your Bitcoin through the refund process and thereby disclose your secret share of the Monero key, which allows the stranger to claim the Monero. The second case is addressed by adding a timelock to the refund script described above that eventually pays the Bitcoin to the stranger. If you or the stranger post the refund script and then you don’t claim the Bitcoin, the stranger can claim the Bitcoin after a pre-determined deadline called (again, for purposes here) the reclaim deadline.

### _Monero Atomic Swaps Details_

The concepts from the previous section lead to the ordered steps given here. This, Gugger’s approach, uses two Bitcoin transactions and one Monero transaction. It overcomes the absense of hashlocks or timelocks on Monero and ensures execution of the swap by forcing continued action by participants (particulary by the original Bitcoin owner) to prevent loss before a deadline. The method requires no changes to Monero or Bitcoin—the steps below are implemented in separate software that interact with the Monero and Bitcoin blockchains as they exist.

Here are the steps if you have Bitcoin and want to swap it for Monero with an online stranger:

1. You and the stranger exchange information on cryptocurrency amounts, recipient addresses, and procedures. This includes setting two times: 1) the normal-completion deadline, a time limit to complete the atomic swap normally, and 2) the reclaim deadline, a time limit for you to reclaim your Bitcoin if normal execution fails.
2. You and the stranger create (random) key shares for a Monero private view key and share them openly with each other.
3. You and the stranger each create a (random, secret) key share for a Monero private spend key. You exchange limited information that allows common construction of a Monero address without giving away the private spend key share values, enabled by the fact that the two key shares add together (modulo a special large prime) to give the private spend key.
4. You and the stranger create and sign a Bitcoin script called the refund script. This has two possible execution paths: I) it sends the Bitcoin back to you, with your Monero private key share revealed by your signature claiming it through an adaptor signature combined with a zero-knowledge proof. Or II) using a timelock, only after the reclaim deadline set in step 1 has passed, it allows the stranger to claim the Bitcoin without further disclosure. The stranger’s signature on this makes you feel safe to continue because you can publish it, if needed, and use your signature to recover the Bitcoin through path I) without further action from the stranger. The stranger similarly can publish it and get the Bitcoin through path II) without further action from you. This Bitcoin transaction is held by you and the stranger in reserve and is only published upon failure of the planned atomic swap execution.
5. You create, fund with the Bitcoin-to-swap, and publish a swaplock script to the Bitcoin blockchain. This script has two possible execution paths: I) using 2-of-2 multisig, if your signature using a private key known only to you is provided, the stranger gains the ability to claim the Bitcoin. Otherwise, II) using a timelock, after a the normal-completion deadline established in step 1 has passed, it starts a refund process to you by enabling the refund script described above. By strategically using adaptor signatures, this script together with the refund script in step 4 discloses your Monero spend key share if you claim the Bitcoin and discloses the stranger’s Monero spend key share if the stranger claims the Bitcoin before the reclaim deadline from step 1.
6. The stranger, comfortable after seeing the published swaplock script, moves the Monero-to-swap to the control of the private key created in step 3 by publishing a Monero transaction.
7. Comfortable after seeing the published Monero transaction, with visibility enabled by the Monero view key created in step 2, you provide your signature for the 2-of-2 multisig that will allow the stranger to claim the Bitcoin immediately.
8. The stranger claims and moves the Bitcoin, automatically disclosing, through the power of adaptor signatures with zero-knowledge proof, the stranger’s Monero private key share.
9. You use the stranger’s disclosed private key share to claim the Monero. You can either move it or keep it on the same address indefinitely, as you are the only one who knows the private spend key—because only you know both key shares from step 3. The stranger knows the private view key, but cannot use this to see when you transfer the Monero away.

This process requires interactive participation from you. You cannot just fund the swaplock script in step 5 and go off-line because after the reclaim deadline from step 1 the stranger can claim the Bitcoin without you being able to claim the Monero. The stranger, however, can fund the Monero transaction in step 6 and walk away, ensured of either getting your Monero key share (and through it the private key) or else access to the Bitcoin at any later time.

Should either you or the stranger fail to take necessary steps after funds have been committed, the other party is always able to either reclaim their original cryptocurrency posting, minus fees, or claim the other cryptocurrency. If you post Bitcoin in step 5, and the stranger does not post Monero in step 6, you can wait until the normal-completion deadline passes and refund your Bitcoin. If the stranger posts Monero in step 6 and you fail to give the signature in step 7, the stranger can wait for you to refund your Bitcoin and use the exposed key share to claim the Monero (and if you don’t refund your Bitcoin, the stranger can claim the Bitcoin after the refund deadline, a critical motivator). If the stranger does not claim the Bitcoin in step 8, you can wait until the normal-completion deadline has passed and refund your Bitcoin.

Additional information on the protocol—with insightful discussion of the game theoretic aspects of the approach and how risk of loss forces swap completion—is available from contributor zkao’s Petri-net-illustrated presentation [[6]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b6).

### _Implementation_

Monero atomic swaps have already been implemented for testing and used to exchange Bitcoin and Monero [[7]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b7),[[8]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b8). This proof-of-concept software, however, was not made or validated in a way that would justify safe use by the public. To address this, the Farcaster project to develop fieldable atomic swap software was kicked off in November 2020. It was funded for 2727 Monero (XMR) through Monero’s Community Crowdfunding System (CSS) [[9]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b9) and is expected to finish by the end of 2021. Handles for contributors to the effort are h4sh3d, zkao, kayabaNerve, lederstumpf, and the charlatan. Contributor h4sh3d is Joël Gugger, the author of [[4]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b4).

The software for Farcaster is implemented in Rust, the programming language used for a number of Monero ecosystem projects, like Tari, but different from the C used for core Monero. The Farcaster software has three components running asynchronously. The first two components parallel the standard Monero wallet and node, with a separate client front end and daemon backend. The third component, called the syncer, itself composed of multiple parts, interacts with the cryptocurrency blockchains to publish transactions and gather information. The rationale for this architecture is that it allows easy variation in the front end for future implementations, including lightweight software that can run on mobile devices and communicate with remote daemons. It will also support expansion to other cryptocurrencies.

The ongoing Farcaster effort has many challenges and new developments. For example, the tentative plan is to have features like hardware wallet (Ledger and Trezor) support. Also planned is graphical interface support. The effort will lead to improved Rust libraries for Monero. Threat models designed for the project will validate performance. Methods are planned for enabling participants to find each other. These and the many other issues facing the Farcaster developers can be followed on the #monero-swap IRC channel on freenode, the Farcaster github repository [[10]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b10), and the regular updates from h4sh3d on the Monero Subreddit [[11]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b11).

The algorithm and implementation discussion above focused on the Farcaster project. The COMIT team, which previously implement Grin-to-Bitcoin atomic swaps, is also developing a software implementation for Monero-to-Bitcoin atomic swaps. Their algorithms use essentially the same protocol as that used by by Farcaster [[12]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b12). They have further published ideas on extending the approach to enable Monero to be locked first [[13]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-atomic-swaps.html#b13), though this will require changes to Monero.

### _Benefits and Shortcomings_

Private cryptocurrencies like Monero are suppressed around the world. Because they give empowering privacy protection like cash, their use by citizenry is feared in some countries, which have blocked exchanges from selling them. Atomic swaps will make Monero as available as Bitcoin, and their existence will disincentivize further Monero restriction by making it harder to do. All this will help, and perhaps transform, the Monero ecosystem.

Bitcoin uses a transparent blockchain, through which Bitcoin’s movement can be seen by everyone. This discourages its use as a means of exchange. Some Bitcoin users are unsettled by their purchases being visible not just to banks and government agencies, but to friends and neighbors. Atomic swaps will hide the movement of Bitcoin and comfort users by routing value through the opaque Monero blockchain. This will help the Bitcoin ecosystem.

Atomic swaps, though, are not perfect, and it is important to also understand their limitations and risks. The technique under development requires active participation during the swap process by the Bitcoin swapper, who cannot disconnect between step 5 and the reclaim deadline in the procedure laid out above. This means hardware functionality, Internet connectivity, and possibly even personal availability are required to avoid losing Bitcoin in the swap.

Also, issues remain open regarding the quality of Bitcoin in a swap, as Bitcoin carries history. Holders of Bitcoin tainted by unwelcome past uses will seek to trade those Bitcoin for Monero, and it is unclear how Monero swappers will respond. It is possible that Monero holders will want to investigate the Bitcoin posted in step 5 of the process above before continuing the swap, with the potential of transforming and disrupting the swapping process as it is currently envisioned.

### _Summary_

Atomic swaps are coming to Monero. They use complex algorithms and intricate participant-incentivization techniques, but are understandable. Atomic swaps will allow trustless exchange with Bitcoin by using new technologies that do not require any change to Monero or Bitcoin. Bitcoin is widely accessible and liquid, and atomic swaps with it will improve the availability of Monero to users around the world. Monero has an opaque blockchain, with transactions that are not easily tracked, and atomic swaps with it will improve privacy and liberty for Bitcoin users. Some issues remain to be resolved in determining the final form of the new swapping infrastructure, but it is clear Monero atomic swaps will form a cornerstone for an improved cryptocurrency ecosystem and hopefully through this a better world.

### _Bibliography_

1. Atomic Cross-chain Swaps: Development, Trajectory and Potential of Non-monetary Digital Token Swap Facilities, M.H. Miraz and D.C. Donald, 2019, Annals of Emerging Technologies in Computing (AETiC), vol. 3, no. 1, [arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1902/1902.04471.pdf](https://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/1902/1902.04471.pdf)
2. Discrete Logarithm Equality Across Groups, S. Noether, 2018, [getmonero.org/resources/research-lab/pubs/MRL-0010.pdf](https://www.getmonero.org/resources/research-lab/pubs/MRL-0010.pdf)
3. Monero Atomic Swaps Update, Monero Talk, 2020, [youtube.com/watch?v=36qLupSUJrg](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=36qLupSUJrg)
4. Bitcoin-Monero Cross-chain Atomic Swap, J. Gugger, 2020, [github.com/h4sh3d/xmr-btc-atomic-swap/blob/master/whitepaper/xmr-btc.pdf](https://github.com/h4sh3d/xmr-btc-atomic-swap/blob/master/whitepaper/xmr-btc.pdf)
5. Farcaster Project RFCs, GitHub, [github.com/farcaster-project/RFCs](https://github.com/farcaster-project/RFCs)
6. Bitcoin-Monero Atomic Swaps, zkao, DEFCON28, 2020, [youtube.com/watch?v=-SsE1abFgNM](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=-SsE1abFgNM)
7. Atomic Swaps for Meros – Proof of Concept, [github.com/MerosCrypto/asmr](https://github.com/MerosCrypto/asmr)
8. XMR Cross-chain Atomic Swaps Demo, [github.com/tecnovert/xmrswap](https://github.com/tecnovert/xmrswap)
9. CSS Proposal for Atomic Swaps, 2020, [ccs.getmonero.org/proposals/h4sh3d-atomic-swap-implementation.html](https://ccs.getmonero.org/proposals/h4sh3d-atomic-swap-implementation.html)
10. Farcaster Project GitHub, [github.com/farcaster-project](https://github.com/farcaster-project)
11. Monero Subreddit, [reddit.com/r/Monero](https://www.reddit.com/r/Monero/)
12. Monero-Bitcoin Atomic Swap, D. Karzel, 2020, [medium.com/comit-network/monero-bitcoin-atomic-swap-1cab015d7af9](https://medium.com/comit-network/monero-bitcoin-atomic-swap-1cab015d7af9)
13. Atomic Swaps between Bitcoin and Monero, P. Hoenisch and L. Soriano del Pino, February 2, 2021, [arxiv.org/pdf/2101.12332.pdf](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2101.12332.pdf)
