# Monero Patents

**How patents could impact Monero, and what the community can do. - 25th of February, 2021**

Patents related to Monero hit the news recently when CipherTrace announced filing two patent applications for technology to trace the flow of Monero funds [[1]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b1). Media reporting followed, including pieces with alarming titles like, “Privacy Coins No More? CipherTrace Files Patents for Tracing Monero Transactions” [[2]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b2). This publicity produced concern about CipherTrace’s and other patents, and how they might impact Monero’s development. This article reviews the United States (US) patent process, how patents could impact Monero, and what the community can do about it.

### _The US Patent Process_

Patents in the US are either utility (i.e., how an invention works) or design (i.e., how a particular design looks). Most patents for software technology are of the utility variety. A utility patent can be seen as a deal made by the government with an inventor to stop secrets—if an inventor discloses everything about a new technology to the public record for future use by all, in return the inventor gets a 20-year monopoly. Generally, employees for companies like CipherTrace agree to assign this monopoly power to the company as part of their employment agreement. So, though the inventors are individuals, the company owns any patents that result from the patenting process.

**“A utility patent can be seen as a deal made by the government with an inventor to stop secrets—if an inventor discloses everything about a new technology to the public record for future use by all, in return the inventor gets a 20-year monopoly.”**

To be patentable, technology must be of patent eligible subject matter [[3]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b3), novel [[4]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b4), and nonobvious [[5]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b5). The novelty requirement means that the invention cannot previously be publicly known, publicly used, patented, or described in printed publication. The nonobviousness requirement means that the technology would not be deemed obvious to a person of ordinary skill in the field and cannot be trivial. For example, merely changing decimal numbers to hex, or even applying straightforward probability theory to reason about Monero transaction output decoys would probably not count as nonobvious.

In the patenting process, then, employee inventors—often working with a patent attorney—compile novel, nonobvious technologies into written claims, with those claims being either of the independent or the dependent type. Independent claims stand alone, while dependent claims restrict what has already been claimed. For an example, you can look at the famous Schnorr digital signature patent [[6]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b6) of technology that had to be avoided for Bitcoin. This particular patent includes one independent claim and 10 dependent claims. The dependent claims are all special cases of the independent claim, such as, in claim 7, using short key values in the algorithm of the independent claim. Since dependent claims are further limiting examples of independent claims, reviewing the independent claims of an awarded patent is a quick way to determine its possible strength. (If you want to impress friends and coworkers by quickly critiquing a patent, just read the independent claims.)

If time is of the essence, a company can file what is called a provisional application. A provisional application is an easy way to establish technology ownership without the time, cost, and effort of a full application. Perhaps, for example, a business deal is pending and one side wants to lock in patent protection in case the deal goes through. If it goes through, then a full, non-provisional, application can be filed, and if it does not, the patent can be dropped. A provisional patent application is not reviewed by the United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO); however, it needs to include an enabling description of the technology to secure a valid filing date. For example, a black box diagram calling itself “fast elliptic curve discrete logarithm” without an enabling description would be insufficient. In contrast, a new cryptocurrency exchange website may receive a filing date (and protection) if a person of ordinary skill would be able to make and use the invention, even without providing all of the code. A provisional application may be converted to a full utility patent application up to one year after filing. After filing a provisional application, the technology can be called “patent-pending,” which has marketing and advertising value. In the rest of this article, unless specifically distinguished, patent applications are non-provisional and for utility patents.

A patent application includes the claims, as discussed above, as well as supporting technical information, such as figures. The whole package is submitted with a fee to the (central—there is no state or regional aspect to a submission) US patent office, and after many months the patent office responds by either accepting or rejecting it. If rejected, the reasons for rejection are stated by a person called the examiner. The company responds to a rejection mostly by revising the claims—using material already in the application—and resubmitting it. This process continues back and forth until either the arguments and claim amendments are accepted by the patent office or the applicant decides to abandon the application. Historically, about 56% of applications are eventually accepted [[7]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b7).

The patent process often evolves in a predictable way: In the initial application, the independent claims are broadly drafted and coupled with progressively restrictive dependent claims. This initial attempt is usually rejected (if accepted on the first try, which happens only about 11% of the time [[4]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b4), the claims probably were not as sweeping as they could have been!). After each rejection, the patent examiner’s feedback is used to make the smallest possible changes to try to satisfy the examiner. If done right, this process gives a patent with the maximum coverage that the patent office will allow. The process can take years, though timing often depends on how aggressively the applicant proceeds when interacting with the patent office.

Eventually the patent application may be published on the USPTO website (uspto.gov). Publication comes generally 18 months after the earliest date of the claimed patent protection, called the priority date. The priority date is often the date the application is filed, but may be the date a related provisional application was filed. Inventors can file with a request for non-publication at the time of filing—however, even in this case, the patent application will eventually be published if it is awarded.

A US patent only provides protection in the US. Many (152) countries are part of the 1970 Patent Cooperation Treaty (PCT) and have processes with some connection and similarity, but in general to get protection in any country requires filing through that country’s own patent office. If a US applicant files a special application—called an international (or PCT) application—within one year of filing in the US, that applicant may have some period of time (e.g., up to 30 months) from the US filing date to file in the other countries that signed the treaty. Direct filings in foreign patent offices are also possible and are common in non-PCT countries.

### _Enforcing Patents_

Once a company like CipherTrace has been awarded a patent, it has to undertake its own enforcement using licensing or litigation. There is no police or other government enforcement. If a technology is covered by a US patent, others cannot without permission, in the United States, make, use, sell, offer to sell, or import that technology. Enforcement starts with learning of the infringing activity (which can be hard for software running behind a firewall—sometimes even for software distributed as binaries). After discovery, the company would next contact the potentially infringing entity and ask it to either license the technology or stop using it. If it does neither, then the company may start litigation to stop the infringement.

Litigation is often best avoided as the average cost of patent litigation is in the millions of dollars [8]. Moreover, significant risk comes to a lawsuit-filing patent owner because the defendant may locate pre-existing technologies and publications that invalidate the patent. If such an effort is successful, the patent owner may be left with large legal bills and an invalid patent.

### _CipherTrace’s Patents_

CipherTrace claims its patent applications cover inventions in the following categories (taken verbatim from its press release [[1]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b1)):

- Forensic tools to explore Monero transaction flows to assist in financial investigations.
- Development of original tracing methodologies based on simulation techniques and Bayesian approaches.
- Statistical and probabilistic methods for scoring transaction and clustering likely owners.
- Monero decoy reduction.
- Probabilistic approaches to risk-based Monero money laundering controls.
- Transaction visualization tools and ways to track stolen Monero currencies or illicit Monero.
- Methodologies for gaining intelligence about transactions that rely on third party nodes.
- Active participation in the Monero network to gain intelligence.

Little can be read into this list, as it is not clear that any of these have been awarded as enforceable patents and no claims or additional details are provided. Neither patent application had been published at the time of this writing. And, as discussed earlier, even if the initial claims were known, they may not stand.

Speculatively, the undisclosed patent claims relate to both algorithms and visualization methods. It might be assumed that the technologies claimed as inventions use both Bayesian statistical methods and simulation—they may use Monte Carlo methods, where randomized simulation runs are repeated to estimate statistics. The claims may cover the use of third-party information and information gathering through active Monero nodes to get data to feed the statistical and simulation techniques.

It is worth noting also that CipherTrace’s announcement said their technology was developed as part of work for the US Department of Homeland Security, which indicates the US government may have some rights to the patents if they are granted.

### _The Good Side_

Patents on Monero tracing have a good side for the Monero community. A patent must fully disclose adequate detail surrounding the technology so that the reader understands how to make and use the invention. A company like CipherTrace publishing its technologies may enable Monero developers to clearly see the tracing techniques and, if indeed there is innovation, use aspects in future versions of Monero. An added potential benefit is that patented techniques for attacking Monero privacy will be restricted. For example, if a CipherTrace-patented tracing method works, only CipherTrace and its paying licensees will be able to legally use the method to trace Monero.

### _The Bad Side_

But there could also be problems. A patented technique might be beneficial to Monero in the future but legally not usable. It is hard to know the full nature of this risk, but here is a possible example: say a new technique for recognizing already-spent Monero transaction outputs was patented. Monero hides senders of funds by cryptographically mixing a real spendable output with decoys, and this hypothetical patented technique to find already-spent outputs could be used to remove decoys to facilitate tracing Monero. Yet, worryingly, it could also be used in future versions of Monero to analyze and avoid picking those already-spent outputs as decoys. The patent in this case could restrict Monero from a beneficial use of the technology.

Bad publicity is another concern. Just as was seen with the adverse and inappropriate publicity from the CipherTrace press release, bad press can be expected to accompany new patent awards surrounding Monero. The mere existence of a patent lends credibility to an adversary trying to undermine Monero’s privacy and user protections, even if the patented technology only gives marginal benefit.

### _Defensive Techniques_

Several techniques exist to counter the development of patents around Monero. The first is for the community to publish its own technical knowledge and results as soon as possible. To make an invention unpatentable by a company like CipherTrace, the invention can just be published. In the US, Internet publications can be treated as equal to printed publications for this purpose under patent law. If using this patent-prevention approach, it is important that the date the information is published be clear and unassailable, as that date preceding any attempt to patent the information may allow the publication to be used as prior art against the patent filing.

**“While patent litigation often illustrates the use of intellectual property as a sword, many owners use patents as a shield.”**

While patent litigation often illustrates the use of intellectual property as a sword, many owners use patents as a shield, and another defensive method would be for parts of the community—individuals or organizations—to file their own patents, possibly placing them openly or with restriction in the public domain. The Monero Research Lab, for example, would be a good candidate to do this. A downside to patenting is that it is expensive and time consuming. An upside is that patent priority can be achieved using provisional patents without making the technology public. This could give extra time before entities like CipherTrace know of the technology’s existence.

In another approach, as patent applications are published and patents granted, the community could research pre-existing instances of those technologies to counter the patents’ validity. This could be seen as a community service supporting those wishing to use techniques that should never have been patented. The USPTO allows third parties to challenge the allowance or validity of pending and issued patents using third party challenges such as reexamination proceedings. These approaches may be useful by preventing a patent from ever being awarded. They would also help in dealing with already-granted weak and invalid patents, and the community’s willingness to undertake this kind of research would discourage others from filing Monero-related patents on non-novel or obvious techniques.

Partnering with others in the cryptocurrency industry for defense is another technique. For example, the payments company Square initiated the creation of a non-profit alliance to fight aggressive use of cryptocurrency patents called the Crypto Open Patents Alliance (COPA) [[9]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b9). COPA has been endorsed by its members and encouraged by the advocacy group Coin Center [[10]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b10). Elements of the Monero community could join this organization and benefit from defensive use of COPA's patents to fight patent aggressors.

Finally, after exhausting other techniques, workarounds can be developed, just as the Schnorr patent was worked around for Bitcoin. When developing Bitcoin, Satoshi Nakamoto chose the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) for signatures. It is generally believed that he made this design choice because ECDSA had by that time become a standard in part because it worked around the Schnorr patent. (ECDSA’s predecessor, DSA, was developed specifically to work around the Schnorr patent [[11]](https://www.monerooutreach.org/stories/monero-patents.html#b11).) ECDSA was chosen for Bitcoin despite Schnorr’s simplicity and linearity, which allows neat applications. Yet in spite of this workaround, Bitcoin succeeded spectacularly. The same alternative-finding process could be undertaken for Monero, if needed. An analysis of patent claims may show that there are simple re-designs that avoid infringement. This requires technical work by skilled individuals, particularly if the re-design is complex.

### _Summary_

Patents have come, and will continue to come, to Monero. Patents bring good news in that public patent filings provide Monero developers insight into the current state of the art of relevant technologies, which may be improved upon, as well as insight into potential obstacles that need to be designed around. But there is also bad news in that some patents might impede future Monero improvements, and patents risk bad publicity for Monero. There are steps the Monero community can take to counter these potential problems, though. It can publish its own research in a way that prevents patenting, and maybe even patent some technology itself. The community can research and publicize printed materials and prior instances of patented technology to invalidate and discourage bad patents, and it can initiate third party challenges to invalidate bad patents before they have been awarded or are asserted. And, if there is no other way to counter a patent that impedes Monero development, the community can try to work around it. These approaches provide good options in a world that is readily patenting cryptocurrency-related technology.

### _Acknowledgements_

This article was reviewed by Mark H. Whittenberger, Partner, Holland & Knight, [hklaw.com/en/professionals/w/whittenberger-mark-h](https://www.hklaw.com/en/professionals/w/whittenberger-mark-h).

### _Bibliography_

1. CipherTrace Files Two Monero Cryptocurrency Tracing Patents, November 20, 2020, Press Release, [ciphertrace.com/ciphertrace-files-two-monero-cryptocurrency-tracing-patents](https://ciphertrace.com/ciphertrace-files-two-monero-cryptocurrency-tracing-patents/).
2. Privacy Coints No More? CipherTrace Files Patents for Tracing Monero Transactions, November 22, 2020, Cointelegraph, [cointelegraph.com/news/privacy-coins-no-more-ciphertrace-files-patents-for-tracing-monero-transactions](https://cointelegraph.com/news/privacy-coins-no-more-ciphertrace-files-patents-for-tracing-monero-transactions).
3. 35 U.S.C. § 101, [law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/35/101](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/35/101)
4. 35 U.S.C. § 102, [law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/35/102](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/35/102)
5. 35 U.S.C. § 103, [law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/35/103](https://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/35/103)
6. Method for Identifying Subscribers and for Generating and Verifying Electronic Signatures in a Data Exchange System, U.S. Patent 4,995,082, C. Schnorr, [patft1.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?patentnumber=4995082](http://patft1.uspto.gov/netacgi/nph-Parser?patentnumber=4995082).
7. What is the Probability of Receiving a U.S. Patent?, Volume 17 Issue 1, Yale Journal of Law and Technology, 2015, [digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/yjolt/vol17/iss1/5](https://digitalcommons.law.yale.edu/yjolt/vol17/iss1/5/).
8. Patent Pirates Search for Texas Treasure, M.C. Tyler, Texas Lawyer, September 20, 2004, [wsgr.com/PDFSearch/09202004_patentpirates.pdf](https://www.wsgr.com/PDFSearch/09202004_patentpirates.pdf).
9. Crypto Open Patent Alliance, [open-patent.org](https://open-patent.org/).
10. How an Open Patents Alliance Can Protect All Cryptocurrency Developers, Jerry Brito, October 28, 2020, Coin Center, [coincenter.org/how-an-open-patents-alliance-can-protect-all-cryptocurrency-developers](https://www.coincenter.org/how-an-open-patents-alliance-can-protect-all-cryptocurrency-developers/).
11. Information Security and Privacy in Network Environments, Appendix C: Evolution of the Digital Signature Standard, September 1994, OTA-TCT-606, GPO Stock#052-003-01387-8, [ota.fas.org/reports/9416.pdf](https://ota.fas.org/reports/9416.pdf).