# Breaking Monero 01: Introduction 
*06/09/19*  
_**Introduction to the Breaking Monero series.**_  

**Breaking Monero Episode 01: Introduction**  

https://youtu.be/WOyC6OB6ezA  
Welcome to the first episode of Breaking Monero! Breaking Monero is a series of episodes where we explain the limitations of Monero’s security and privacy in a comprehensive and understandable way. We give a sneak peek into some of the work done behind the scenes to evaluate risks and to make Monero better. It’s an ongoing process, and we are happy to have you here along with us for this part of Monero’s journey! 

[All Breaking Monero Episodes](https://www.monerooutreach.org/breaking-monero/) 

_**Episode Transcription**_ 

_Justin:_ Hello everyone and welcome to the first episode of Breaking Monero. Breaking Monero is a series of episodes where we explain the limitations of Moneros security and privacy in a comprehensive and understandable way. We will get a sneak peek into some of the work done behind the scenes to evaluate risks and to make Monero better. It’s an on-going process and we’re happy to have you along with us for this part of Monero’s journey. So, to introduce your hosts, my name is Justin Ehrenhofer, the organizer of the Monero Community workgroup and I’ve been talking to people about Monero for about three years and have really been looking at Ring Signatures in particular for about the past year and a half. But I know that you’re here to hear from our other two guests, Surang and Surae. Sarang, can you please introduce yourself? 

_Sarang:_ Hello, I go by Sarang Noether and I am a PhD researcher working for Monero Research Lab along with Surea who will introduce himself shortly. I do full time work, doing analysis, protocol improvements and developments, security reviews and things like that for the Monero Project and the surrounding Monero ecosystem. And that of course, involves a whole lot of different things, one of which is to examine some of Monero’s limitations and how we iterate on those to make them better which is the purpose of being here for this episode series. 

_Justin:_ All right, Surae? 

_Surae:_ Hi, I am Brandon Goodell, my handle on the Monero channels is Surae Noether. I’ve been looking at and working on Monero for about four to five years now. One of the most important parts about security, when it comes to cryptography, finances and just security in general is to try to expose problems in the system to try to make it better. I think that talking about how to break Monero and bringing issues to light is going to do a lot of good things for people’s financial privacy. In particular, it’s not going to lead people down a garden path, thinking that Monero is the most secure thing in the world. And maybe, if you’re using technology that that involves encryption, to keep yourself safe in your everyday experiences and knowing exactly the limitations of how that technology works, knowing exactly what it does and does not do is going to be very critical in determining how you go about using that technology. So, conversations like Breaking Monero are really important and they’re going to make Monero better. 

_Justin:_ All right, thank you Surae and Sarang, we’re really pleased to have both of you on. This is going to be a series of multiple episodes where we’ll be diving into several of the limitations of Monero, mostly related to privacy, but also related to security and what we can see going forward. Breaking Monero is a series that really helps people understand these limitations going forward, what it really means to people and what people may have to do to adapt to these sorts of limitations. It’s for someone who already understands the basics of Monero, understands maybe what a Ring Signature is at a broad level so make sure to look at existing community resources if you have not already looked at those before. It’s not for someone though, who’s looking to go directly into the math or other related resources. For that we have other resources like [Zero to Monero](https://www.getmonero.org/library/Zero-to-Monero-1-0-0.pdf) where you can take a deep dive into the cryptography. The level of math or cryptography covered in this series is going to be slim to none, it’s really about making sure people understand the big, major ideas from these regards. One important thing to note is that Monero’s privacy and security over time have changed dramatically. It’s not a sort of static situation where privacy has stayed the same over the years, instead Monero is really an evolving test-bed of sorts in terms of the level of privacy and security it provides and how it provides these different mechanisms. Sarang, did you have something? 

_Sarang:_ Yeah, I think a common misconception in this space, and kinda just in the cryptographic and computer science space in general is that things like privacy and anonymity are just some kind of switch where it’s either off or it’s on or you have it or you don’t. I understand why people have those misconceptions, projects like Monero often just to make things easier for people will say “we’re private” or “we’re anonymous or fungible.” But even down at the base, formal level when it does come down to the math, there are ways to formalize the different threat models and use cases for which you might want privacy or anonymity. So it all depends on very particular models. So when we say things like “private” or “anonymous” it really does become an iterative process. Taking different threat models that people have or different use cases people have and trying to tailor the way that we design the system and how people use the system in order to meet those needs. So when people say, “why do you keep changing this all the time?” or “why is it iterative, why can’t you just go get it right all at once?” Well, it’s because the formalization of this is very complex, and the way people use it changes over time as well. As we’re going to talk about later, people are probably going to be using exchanges more often and we’re going to talk about the fact that that comes with certain consequences. As opposed to people just using a cryptographic asset in a peer-to-peer sense. So as people’s uses change over time and as we have a better understanding of what those threat models are, we iterate on it. So, Monero does continue to get better over time. It should get better over time and it does get better over time, so it’s not a switch, we just keep making it better. 

_Surae:_ Another thing that I would like to point out, actually it was pointed out to me recently by Josh Goldbard at MobileCoin. He pointed out the difference between ‘privacy’ and ‘secrecy.’ The idea of privacy may include something like protecting from you neighbors being able to peek into your house, but the idea of secrecy is complete and total secrecy, information stored inside of a black hole. And there are gradients from one end to the other and I think that a lot of people in this space, like Sarang just pointed out, think that secrecy is just a switch that you can just turn on and all of a sudden all your information is in a black hole. When in fact, we have to climb this mountain of privacy inch by inch, attacking one feature at a time because there really is no way to obtain perfect secrecy. 

_Sarang:_ That’s a really good point too, especially when it comes to something like a crypographic asset where you are inherently interacting publically with people. You may be keeping thing about your transaction secret and safe with Monero, but you’re still broadcasting data to the entire world. It would be a pretty useless ledge if it only existed in a black box. So if you want perfect secrecy, encrypt all your data, chop all your ethernet cables, throw away your wifi router and don’t talk to anybody. That’s a black box for information secrecy, but it’s also pretty useless. The fact that we have to do interactions means that there’s information flowing, and the fact that there’s information flowing means the attack surface that we have to consider is pretty large. But once again, like has been said, it’s not a switch. 

_Justin:_ I think that generally and important distinction, I know that Sarang and I include this in a lot of our talks about privacy, that sure a feature might make something on or off, but that doesn’t mean that it’s perfectly private or perfectly transparent. So it’s important to stratify and communicate to people that these are very nuanced, it’s very difficult to say exactly what privacy is provided, the best way we can do that is based on people’s use cases and threat models. 

_Surae:_ I do have one more comment, and this is more of a broad comment about the world in general. Privacy, information privacy is a race between you and people who want your information. It’s an arms race, like a cold war. And as you develop new technologies, you’re going to find people who figure out ways to heuristically get around the fact that you hide some information with cryptography. The simplest example of this the $4 Wrench Attack, right, the best way to get someone’s private keys is to threaten them over the head with a wrench. 

_Justin:_ To cover some of the things that we’ll be speaking about in later episodes, we’re really going to be talking about things that are most relevant to Monero today, at least as a main focus. What the real limitation of privacy and security are now, but in order to understand a lot of these current concerns we’re also going to look to the past a little bit and discuss what previous issues Monero has had and how we addressed them. And we’ll cover some of those basics in Breaking Monero since we’ve had 0-Decoy transactions, which again, aren’t a concern in Monero anymore, but was a large issue that Monero needed to address and improve upon as we made Monero better and more private. However, we’ll also cover quite a few current considerations like metadata analysis, poisoned output analysis, IP metadata analysis and other potential attacks where people will try to either probably know something or heuristically try to figure out information about other users to impact the information learned as your transacting on the Monero blockchain. These are all things to look forward to in the next few episodes, but of course you also need to keep in mind what your use case is when using Monero. What are you trying to use Monero to protect you from? If you’re just using Monero to hide a Christmas present, or a holiday present that you’re purchasing for one of your friends, you probably don’t need a very strict sort of threat model. Meanwhile, if you’re in a country where they’re trying to surveil everything that you’re doing on the internet, you obviously have a much stricter threat model. We need to help balance these things, this Breaking Monero series can’t tell you what you’re specific use case is, but we can try to cover what sort of considerations you should be thinking about, and you as a listener will have to figure out if it’s important to you and if it’s relevant to you. Do either of you have a recommendation to help people make that sort of determination? 

_Sarang:_ One thing I’d like to say, is that I really don’t like the lack of distinction between things like the word ‘analysis’ and things like the word ‘attack.’ So we’re going to talk about a lot of different ways that an adversary or the good guys, like us, who also want to think like an adversary - there’s a lot of different ways that the adversary might try to get certain kinds of information by examining transaction behavior or the Monero blockchain itself. But say that you have a method of analysis or you have an attack, whatever that means does not necessarily mean that you’ve broken anything or that you’ve defeated a particular use case. The analogy I like to think of in my head is old-school, old stone castle walls. There are a lot of different ways you can think of to attack that castle. You could try to attack it with ping-pong balls, and that is technically a way that you could try to attack a castle wall, but it’s not really going to do a whole lot. You could take a giant cannon ball and try to attack the castle wall, and that’s going to have a much different effect. So when you talk about different forms of analysis, that have different impacts, some of them, especially older forms of analysis might have given the adversay different types of information than the different kinds of analysis today. I think that’s important to keep in mind. So when we’re talking about attacking Monero, we’re not going to tell you how to de-anonymize people, but these are different forms of analysis that you might try to do to eke out bits of information, or ideas behind what we call heuristics, which are more-or-less educated guesses about information. They’re very different things and it doesn’t necessarily mean that you have anything to be terrified about, but they’re the different kinds of ways you might go about trying to do an attack with different kinds of analysis. 

_Surae:_ One thing I’d like to add is that essentially, even if you compare Monero or other private cryptocurrencies like ZCash, or Verge - if you compare those currencies to something like cash, how many witnesses to a transaction do you need for cash transactions. It’s usually two, one person handing off a $20 bill to another person. There may be no other witnesses and no other record of that transaction. If we compare something like Monero to a model that’s based on a cash model, and we can walk away from that comparison relatively favorably or with a list of issues that we can attack about how we’re different from cash, then we can walk away with some sort of model about how to improve. So for example, if you look at our different threat models, even in a cash-based world and you have someone who’s spearfishing, and they’re targeting a specific individual and gathering as much information as possible about one specific individual, even if you’re using cash, that individual is probably pretty screwed. The law enforcement agents are probably going to mark the bills somehow, trace you down and use the serial numbers to catch you. On the other hand, if you have something like dragnet surveillance that’s trying to do a large scale analysis of a whole blockchain at once you’ll have different models to deal with. If you’re the sort of person who’s afraid of being spearfished, then I would say generally to go try to live in the woods somewhere and never interact with another human being ever because even your cash transactions are vulnerable. On the other hand, if you’re someone interested in avoiding a dragnet surveillance situation maybe you concerned about the state of how much information Facebook or Amazon have about you, then something like Monero will provide the sort of protection that you need in order to lead a private lifestyle in the 21st century - which is sort of a joke. 

_Sarang:_ But it’s a laudable goal anyway, that’s why we’re all here. 

_Justin:_ Thank you both for your comments on that topic. We’ll be talking more about those use cases in the specific attacks we’ll be discussing in future episodes. So to wrap up and conclude this, we want to state clearly that Monero isn’t perfect, there are issues with Monero and we want to speak about them here. But we feel that by having an open dialog and communicating what the limitations are about Monero, we have the best chance of making it better and making sure that people are using it in a way where they understand how it works. Sure, it’s not going to be that everyone knows how to use the tool properly, there will be some people who make mistakes or do things certain ways. But we want to make sure that at a minimum, people who try to learn about how to use this tool, that they can do so in a way that they feel comfortable with for whatever threat model they have. And we also want to improve the Monero protocol so that the normal use model of Monero fits what their expectations are. This is really the sort of things we want to talk about and open a dialog for outside of the normal research community in this Breaking Monero series, to make it more available for the outside community and others to learn about and get an initial impression of. Overall, we’re doing this to make Monero better, not to point out necessariliy that Monero is terrible. Everything will have limitations and we want to speak openly about them and what we’ve done to make them better. Ultimately, I think it’s a pretty shared view amoung Monero contributors that Monero has been the best tool that you can use to protect your privacy for really it’s whole existence. Where even though Monero has never been perfect, and it was much worse in the past than it is now, well, previous privacy solutions were worse in the past than they are now and everything has improved over time and Monero has continuously led the charge in order to make existing privacy technologies better. At least that’s my personal take on it, and I think by having these discussions we’ll be able to keep advancing Monero further. I suppose that’s really all I have to talk about in this initial Breaking Monero episode, it’s simply an indication about what we’re going to get at in the future when we analyize some of these attacks, discuss some of this terminology in a much simpler way. We will have diagrams, images and whiteboard type videos to show people a little more clearly how everything intertwines and we really want to make this a resource to help you. Any last remarks? 

_Surae:_ Yes, there’s one last point I’d like to make. You said a moment ago that everyone on the Monero team thinks of Monero as the best option right now for privacy preserving technology. I want to point out that there are a lot of good options for privacy preserving technology in the cryptocurrency space. Each stem from a totally different design philosophy, so for example, ZCash uses a trusted setup, and if you trust that setup then their privacy is fantastic if you stay in the shielded pool and you don’t do anything silly like giving away your wallet information - then ZCash is great. But Monero has this design philosophy that is inherited from CryptoNote and inherited from BitCoin that we should try to avoid trusted setups at all costs. Personally, I think Monero is the best option because relying on privacy to me isn’t as important as lacking a trusted setup, because one of the things that cryptocurrencies bring to the world is this algorithmic finance that trusted third parties are removed from the situation. Like that cash transaction I mentioned earlier, two people handing off a $20 bill, there’s no trusted third-party there. Even though the design philosophies of these teams vary and the technology that comes with it, as long as you’re willing to assume the threat model of the ZCash situation, that the trusted setup was not violated, ZCash is great. Just like if you’re willing to take on the threat model of Monero, that we’ll be discussing more in this series, then Monero is better. So it really depends on what your level of risk tolerance is, what you’re willing to trust and what you’re not willing to trust. 

_Sarang:_ I just want to follow along with that, as you presumably go along and examine alternatives to Monero, things that Monero is based on, or things based on Monero, or just other projects that are trying to do the same sort of thing. I think going to those and asking for the same kind of analysis should be absolutely expected. Any cryptographic project that’s worth it’s salt should be doing this analysis internally already, whether or not they tell you about it is a different thing. The ZCash team for example, does analysis on their project and as Brandon has said, there are tradeoffs and limitations in that scheme and there are tradeoffs and limitations to Monero’s as well. I think doing this kind of analysis out in the open speaks both to the strengths of Monero and the fact that we do have trust in it. Also an open dialog about it is important to engender that trust. So you see us doing it, you should demand that your other favorite projects, or least favorite projects do the exact same thing, and if they won’t, that’s a little skeptical. 

_Justin:_ All right, thank you both, Sarang and Surae for joining us here on our first episode of Breaking Monero. Again, we’ll be having other episodes coming out in the near future, so stay tuned. We’ll be covering topics ranging from IP metadata analysis to the difficulty when people reveal alot of view key information, to the poison output attacks, so we’re really trying to give a comprehensive view over a lot of the major concerns in relation to Monero’s security and privacy. We hope this will be a useful resource to you going forward. Take care everybody. 
