# Breaking Monero 11: Mailbag Episode

**Breaking Monero Episode 11: Mailbag Episode**

https://youtu.be/q1gdYWsvXDU

In this episode, we answer several questions from audience members.

[An Introduction to Mathematical Cryptography](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3884171-an-introduction-to-mathematical-cryptography)  
[Introduction to Modern Cryptography](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/24387035-introduction-to-modern-cryptography-second-edition)  
[An Intensive Introduction to Cryptography](https://intensecrypto.org/public/index.html)  
[Monero Konferenco](https://monerokon.com/)

_**Episode Transcription**_
---

_**Justin:**_ Welcome back the eleventh episode of Breaking Monero. This is a special episode where we have a mailbag Q&A session where people have submitted questions based on the previous episodes of Breaking Monero and we're going to answer them for you. We have, me, Justin on and we have Brandon and Sarang with us today. We have a lot of questions that we can go through and we hope this will be able to help cover some of the gaps that we either need to re-clarify in some of the Breaking Monero series or just other questions that you thought were relevant for the Monero Research Lab contributors. So, welcome Brandon, welcome Sarang.

_**Justin:**_ The first question that came in and that we're going to cover from [episode 2](https://www.monerooutreach.org/breaking-monero/ring-signatures.php) said that during a [Monero Talk](https://www.monerotalk.live/) episode, Andrew Poelstra brought up the idea where Monero could have either perfect anonymity with how it shields funds or a perfect guarantee that funds cannot created. Can you talk about the perfectly binding versus perfectly hiding things Sarang?

_**Sarang:**_ I'm assuming what this is actually talking about, and I haven't seen this episode so I don't know exactly what Andrew's words were, but the idea is that Monero and some other types of digital assets basically hide the amount of a transaction in what's called a Peterson Commitment and that is basically a way to mask what the amount is but in an algebraically useful way. And by algebraically useful, I mean that there are operations we can perform on transactions that use elliptic curve algebra and arithmetic to basically ensure that funds are not created out of thin air and that the transactions balance. And in this so-called commitment schemes, or hiding schemes there's two properties. There's a property of hiding, which means that even an all powerful adversary either can or cannot determine what the hidden amount of that transaction was. There's a property sometimes called binding, the binding property means that it would or would not be possible for an all powerful approver or user of the system to be able to basically open a commitment to different values. So basically it's whether or not a commitment actually forces you to one particular value and it turns out that mathematically you can't really have both of these be completely perfect. So Peterson Commitments are in fact perfectly hiding, I mean that even an all powerful, computationally unbounded adversary can never determine what the hidden value is, there's always a way to have deniability in that. But Peterson Commitments do not have in fact perfectly binding, they are so-called computationally binding, which means that under certain computational constraints, you're basically limited to one particular amount, but they're not perfectly binding which means that an all powerful proofer or user of the system could in theory open a commitment to multiple values. And that's not really good if you want to ensure that it's not ever, ever possible to create funds or make transactions that appear to balance, but in fact, don't. From a practical perspective, these are well understood constructions and these computational constraints are entirely reasonable, but that's why we call these things computationally binding and not perfectly binding. There are other commitment schemes, another common one is called the El Gamal Commitment Scheme which basically flips that, so and El Gamal Commitment Scheme, if a project were to use that, effectively means that you're no longer perfectly hiding and that computationally unbounded adversary could find out what the hidden amount was, but in effect you are perfectly binding, which means that you couldn't later open that commitment to another amount. The idea about whether or not Monero could move to something that flips this is complicated. Such a thing would have to be consistent with the types of signatures that we use and the kind of range proofs that we use. There was talk in the [Bulletproofs paper](https://eprint.iacr.org/2017/1066.pdf) for example about how one might go about modifying the protocols in a way that would be more computationally and space intensive, that could flip them to El Gamal commitments, but again, such a thing would have to be consistent with the other schemes that we use. Practically speaking, this isn't an issue because we assume certain computational constraints on adversaries and users of the system. Brandon, do you have any comments you want to make regarding commitment schemes?

_**Surae:**_ Sure, actually Tim Roth has looked into something called Switch Commitments, which I believe you mentioned, and the idea behind Switch Commitments is to use something that is perfectly hiding until quantum computers start to break them and then switch over to something that is no longer perfectly hiding, but perfectly binding to prevent quantum computers from screwing around with balances. One possible route that Monero could go in the future, I'm not saying we're doing that soon, but one possible route is for us to start using Switch Commitments specifically to try to get the best of both worlds. We can get the perfectly hiding property for now, until we need the binding property later.

_**Justin:**_ Do you think that for people who are used to a completely transparent system, like Bitcoin, where they're confident in the amount of supply of Bitcoin that is available, that a perfectly binding scale is perhaps an easier sell and say that privacy is important, but I'd rather sacrifice privacy if needed if computers become computationally competent to be able to handle these tasks. Do you foresee that these sorts of commitment schemes are more likely to make their way into systems like Bitcoin?

_**Surae:**_ I definitely think that something like Switch Commitments would be an easier sell for a project like Bitcoin. Bitcoin is an extremely conservative project because they are the leaders in a lot of ways. They are at the frontier in terms of research, but they don't want to make a move unless they're absolutely sure that they're not going to be breaking everything, which is a really great and admirable way to go about developing something like a currency. The thing is, to fear post-quantum apocalypse of quantum computers being able to peel apart your Monero balances and seeing how much you own, it's not really practical right now, it's not a big fear in my mind and the reason is that if post quantum computers become a thing, every Amazon transaction is going to become insecure, the entire internet is basically going to fall apart. I mean, not quite as bad as all of that, but post quantum fears are largely overblown right now and so even though it would be an easier sell to do something like Switch Commitments, you're preparing for an apocalypse that could never come.

_**Sarang:**_ I think it's also worth noting that Bitcoin doesn't need to use amount commitments because they don't hide amounts, everything is already wide out in the open already.

_**Justin:**_ All right, cool. Anything else you'd like to cover in this question, Sarang or Brandon?

_**Surae:**_ Just to point out, even though Bitcoin doesn't hide amounts, people have proposed in the past to do confidential transactions with Bitcoin without using ring signatures, just hiding amounts and that was kind of the original confidential asset proposal by Greg Maxwell.

_**Sarang:**_ Yeah, it was actually proposed for Bitcoin, and then we ended up adopting it, but in a ring happy form.

_**Justin:**_ In the series Breaking Monero, we don't really go over the core mathematics, we more talk at a high conceptual level for people to understand really what's going on, and so we had one person ask us, even though we won't go over that mathematics, that they would like to know what some of the best text books are that helps get them introduced to these basics, so they can start learning a little bit more about it. So I'm going to start with you again, Sarang. What are some recommendations that you have for people who are perhaps getting started at an undergraduate level and want to learn more about these cryptographic schemes?

_**Sarang:**_ Well, you're in luck because, totally coincidentally, I happen to have two books with me right now. Either I brought them in advance, or I just keep them next to me at all times, you get to decide.

_**Surae:**_ Nerrrd...nerrrd.

_**Sarang:**_ Oh, absolutely. So a lot of this depends on what level you want to approach this from and what background you're already coming in with. If you're comfortable and familiar with basic undergraduate algebra and want to take off from there, one good book, I'll hold up here, by Hoffstein, Pipher and Silverman is called An [Introduction to Mathematical Cryptography](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/3884171-an-introduction-to-mathematical-cryptography). There are newer and older editions, depending on what your needs are, and this does a good job of introducing some classical and modern encryption techniques assuming from the start just a good solid knowledge of elementary algebra, you know high school and college level algebra. It's a good book for that, it's not a good book for very advanced techniques, nor is it really good for secure implementations. It talks about the math behind it, but I would not rely on that to do any kind of secure implementation, but, it's a very good book. Another one, if you are interested in a bit more formal approach, and this book is not necessarily for the faint of heart. This is Katz and Lindell's [Introduction to Modern Cryptography](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/24387035-introduction-to-modern-cryptography-second-edition). This book is kind of like an advanced undergraduate slash beginning graduate book on a lot of the formalizations behind certain constructions. It's a very, very good, very, very thorough book; I would not say to grab that if you're just getting started. It does a really good job talking about the formalizations, there are a lot of other good ones, but those are two that hit two big levels. Just starting out with the math and really wanting to nail down some of the security proofs and things like that.

_**Surae:**_ I just learned the other day of this document called An [Intensive Introduction to Cryptography](https://intensecrypto.org/public/index.html) which is a collection of slides and such from Harvard. They're currently using it at Clemson University to teach a blockchain course.

_**Justin:**_ And the great thing about that one, is it's just free PDFs online, so you can just view them.

_**Surae:**_ It's always nice to get free PDFs. I don't know how to get free PDFs except for directly from the authors.

_**Justin:**_ So, I think with that, we can move on to the next question which is saying that they're interested in, following our [fifth episode](https://www.monerooutreach.org/breaking-monero/input-selection-algorithm.php) about how people will use AI and other techniques to find more heuristics on the Monero blockchain. We stated that there is no limit to the heuristics people could try to use to learn information about transactions on Monero and they had a question that asked. Is the selection of Monero outputs based on factors related to the real output or are the decoys chosen completely independently of the outputs?

_**Sarang:**_ So, I do know that we have a question later on in the lineup that's going to talk a little bit more about data that's on or off-chain, but just specifically with this question asking about how outputs are selected. The way that we select outputs and decoys for transactions, we did of course talk about it in an earlier episode, and it has be iterated over time, but the answer to the question about whether or not decoys are selected based on factors directly related to the true output that's being spent, the answer to that is no. We have particular distributions in ways that we do that selection which are intentionally independent of the truly selected output. You want to have the statistics of the decoy selection be as good and as independent as possible. As we've talked about, that's been iterated over time, in fact there will be at the next point release, a little tweak to the way that selections are being done that will help to mitigate some issues that came up with the way that outputs are weighted based on the size of blocks for example. So constantly iterated on, a theme that we have going throughout this series is that yes, there are a lot of heuristics available, and we try to hit the biggest ones, and output selection is one of them.

_**Justin:**_ Several researchers have recommended that Monero include at least some sort of binning, and by this I mean some sort of output selection in relation to the real output. Let's say that the output was generated in a specific block, one rule potentially would be to include one other decoy that comes from that block or include a decoy from any other set time period, or any number of circumstances. How far off are we from really determining whether or not those sorts of solutions have a net positive tradeoff or something we'd like to improve and eventually put into Monero?

_**Surae:**_ Well, actually that's funny, I'm right now working on Monero Research Lab's bulletin number 11. We're currently running simulations on various methods to see, we want to ask the question how can we ensure that the way we construct output selection minimizes the probability that somebody could be singled out as the true signer. Unfortunately, there's a lot of challenges to this. One of the things that we're currently running is large-scale simulations and we're just raw trying to pick out methods that produce the worst results when you try to break the Monero blockchain down. The main question is whether or not binning is helpful, and to what level binning is helpful and this is currently and active area of research and I only have some preliminary result and I don't want to speak too much about that, but maybe Sarang would have some thoughts.

_**Sarang:**_ There have been different proposals over time for how you might do some kind of binning that selects ring members based on each other, based on block, based on time or different things. Part of it just comes down to the practical element. If our ring size is going to have a certain number of ring members, and we know we want a certain kind of time selection that selects a lot of newer outputs and then a few older outputs based on whatever algorithm you're using. And if you also want to take for certain decoys, bins surrounding those or whatever scheme you want, eventually, you run out of space. It's also a kind of arms race between the things you'd like to do with output selection and practically what we're willing to accept in terms of ring size. As we've often said, are larger ring sizes better and with all things being equal, yes, absolutely. And in terms of binning? Totally, there's a whole lot more you can do with them. But that also has a lot of other implications for space and time. Other project I know take a different approach to ring size, partly for that reason. As long as we have the limitations that we do, there's only so much that we can do with binning. If we're going to move to such a thing at some point, we want to make sure that we do it right and in a way that maintains this balance.

_**Surae:**_ Not only that, there's something that's sort of hidden and implicit in these questions that there's one best way to do it. Depending on what your threat model is, sometimes you don't need to do any sort of binning at all. It's not clear yet what various scales of threat model we're dealing with when it comes to making decisions like output selection and binning in general. The short answer is, it depends and will always be context dependant and depending on your threat model it may be unnecessary for you to use bins to construct ring signatures. As a consequence, as a development team should we be focusing on the users who would really benefit the most from binning and everyone else just has to subsidize the cost to the blockchain if we end up doing some new protocol, or should we take a look at what the average user is dealing with and what sort of threat model they have to deal with. Because at the end of the day if someone is doing a spear phishing tracking on you, they're actually targeting you as an individual there's not too much that all of our privacy research and output selection can really do for you. On the other hand, if you're just worried about large-scale, passive dragnet style surveillance, then maybe Monero is already currently doing exactly what you need it to do, it's not really clear.

_**Justin:**_ Thanks, both of you. We'll come back to other questions in relation to what people's threat models are later. But I'm going to move on to another question that came in from the [seventh episode](https://www.monerooutreach.org/breaking-monero/remote-nodes.php) that was asking for more clarification between what privacy that Monero provides versus the privacy provided with the Lightening Network and a little more broadly what Lightening Network and other off-chain solutions might look like for Monero. Sarang, could you give a little bit of background on what the impact is of these off-chain solutions?

_**Sarang:**_ It's important to differentiate between on-chain transaction solutions and off-chain transaction solutions. We're all very familiar with on-chain transactions and approaches. Bitcoin has an approach to doing transactions on-chain, which has been around for quite a while. Monero has it's own on-chain transactions that we as Monero users use on a day-to-day basis. But the idea behind off-chain solutions is that if different parties can lock up some funds on the chain in whatever way the protocol dictates, do some later, verifiable work to transact between each other, or between multiple parties with some kind of broader network level approach, then later settle back up on the chain to make sure that the balance all works out and no one was able to steal funds from anyone else. The idea is that if you can offload a lot of that computation and space that could be good for verification times, it could be good for payment times and blockchain space scaling and things like that. In Bitcoin, it's a bit more straightforward and in Monero it's quite a bit more complicated. Part of the reason for that is that there's certain plumbing that you need in place. For example in Bitcoin, if you lock up funds for some kind of off-chain solution based on whatever protocol you want to use, if something goes wrong, you need a way to abort that and return the funds to whomever locked them up. That works pretty well in Bitcoin because you can tell where funds came from. The protocol can basically non-interactively just dictate that those funds get returned. But in Monero, ideally, you don't know where funds came from, so while it's fairly easy to do an interactive refund where I could just send funds back to you if I know who you are, it's not possible right now to do that non-interactively and just have the protocol automatically take care of it. There are some proposals for ways we could introduce new plumbing to take care of this but the math and crypto are quite complicated and there are a lot of subtleties involved. That among other things is why it's just a lot more difficult with Monero, it comes down to the math, the plumbing and the fact that ours is quite different from a lot of other solutions. We'd like to be able to do such a thing, but it's going to have to be a lot more custom than what some other projects may be able to do.

_**Justin:**_ Anything you'd like to add Brandon?

_**Surae:**_ Mainly that the comparison of the Lightening Network off-chain stuff to on-chain stuff, Sarang did a delightful job describing. The main thing is that a lot of off-chain solutions from Monero just have to function very differently and it's an active area of research just like a lot of other things. Unfortunately, this is my usual answer when people ask me questions, is it depends and we'll find out soon.

_**Justin:**_ All right, thanks again. The next question is related to our [ninth episode](https://www.monerooutreach.org/breaking-monero/poisoned-outputs.php) and there are many people that watched the three of us go through and test heuristics, share heuristics that can be used on the Monero blockchain and they become very disappointed, they say “wow, there's so many things people can do to learn information about how people are using Monero.” Is there ever going to be a solution where we don't need to worry about this at all, were it ultimately is a black box where no one can see anything going on in there? So based off the tradeoffs that we have today, let's start with you Surae. What's your take on people who say “well, I'm disappointed that there are so many limitations to existing cryptocurrencies, will there ever be a private cryptocurrency that is perfect?”

_**Surae:**_ The short answer is, what do you mean by perfect? Just like a moment ago, everything depends and everything is context dependant. People like to throw the word ‘fungible’ around, so let's think about a fungible commodity, something that literally, an ounce of it here can be exchanged for an ounce here and you can never really tell where it came from. The classic example of a fungible commodity is oil, barrels of oil. Well, we can track those things, we can either track the barrel itself or if I really want to track the oil inside, I can taint it with a radioactive isotope and later I can test for it and I can find out if the oil in this new barrel came from the barrel I was tracing in the first place. So if you're talking about trying to eliminate the traceability of some sort of commodity, just in general, you have to recognize that there are certain limitations. The most fungible things in the world are still pretty traceable. A black hole leaks information about the contents beyond the event horizon. There's no way that we can reasonably expect that some magic SNARKs will come out next year that will protect your financial information from all prying eyes forever. I think there's a level of practicality that we have to expect out of these projects. If you're trying to design the perfect encryption system but you give away your private keys, it doesn't matter how good the encryption system was. When people use things like Know Your Customer (KYC) exchanges, when people use the internet without using Tor, or without using a VPN or something along those lines they're just fundamentally leaking data all over the place. And all that data is off-chain data that has nothing to do with the stuff that ends up on-chain, just like Sarang was mentioning a moment ago. I think the practical problem here is that people want perfect privacy and it's impossible. However, we can expect things like plausible deniability in a court of law, stuff like that. Being able to provide reasonable privacy tools does not absolutely mean perfectly shielding everybody from every possible threat, it's just not practical. Maybe Sarang has different opinions.

_**Sarang:**_ I like thinking about the differences between on-chain data that's available and off-chain data that may be available. On-chain is just saying that suppose all you get is a USB stick that contains the blockchain, you get no other information, you go into a sealed room and see what information you can pull out. We've talked a lot about the ways that Monero has evolved over the years that's changed what information is available there. In some cases it is possible to extract certain amounts of information about the structure of the blockchain, but we try to mitigate that as much as we can. As we always say, it's an iterative approach, a lot of fixes introduce other subtleties that we want to make sure we understand the risk/reward of. Off-chain data is a lot more broad. Your ISP knows a lot about you, if you interact with exchanges, those exchanges can get information about you depending on the network level solutions you might use like Tor, I2P or VPN, the way that we relay transactions themselves from node-to-node can in theory leak information. Those things are also things that we want to keep working on, but there are a lot of different challenges there. We want to hit the threat models that we feel that we can reasonably hit and otherwise we keep iterating on solutions as we understand the risk-benefit reward to.

_**Justin:**_ I think the two of you put that really well, thank you. As you both stated, everyone wants perfect privacy but we can't get perfect privacy, but we can probably get good enough depending on the use case, so I think that's framed really well. For the next question, they ask, what if Bitcoin core devs decide to implement all of Monero's features, will that make Monero obsolete? Will Monero no longer have a purpose if Bitcoin says today we're adding ring signatures, or we're adding RingCT? What is your take, we'll start with Sarang.

_**Sarang:**_ We talked about this a little bit before and I said “oh my god, that would be an amazing problem to have.” I still hold that to be true. I would love people to care about financial privacy in this way. Right now, a lot of folks are fine using something that's transparent like Bitcoin, where either their threat model doesn't necessarily prevent the use of such a thing or if it's just not something that they think about. If Bitcoin or some other asset were to add fantastic privacy features and people started using more privacy conscious digital assets, I think that's great. I've never thought about this space as being a zero-sum game where if one project or asset does better than all the other ones must do worse. I don't think that that's necessarily true. A lot of this comes from academia and the computer science and math world where information and ideas are shared and implemented where they make sense. That's how this works. We get a lot of ideas from all over the place, a lot of them make it into Monero, our hope is that some things we do make it into other projects and make them better. I think the entire space grows as folks better understand how to make privacy better.

_**Surae:**_ In addition to that, what I love about this question is that it reminds me of the Ship of Theseus from philosophy, or if you have a broom and the broom handle breaks and you replace the broom handle and then all the bristles at the end of the broom get worn out and you replace the brush part of the broom. Is it the same broom as it was if you replace every plank on the ship, is it still the same ship? If Monero's underlying ended up getting implemented into Bitcoin, would it still be Bitcoin? Would the new implementation just be a different implementation of Monero? I don't know how that would work, it's kind of like asking what if the sky was purple? I don't know, like, what if, man? It's an interesting question, but like Sarang said, it would be a really good problem to have. If the Monero approach behind ring signatures or anonymity sets or hiding amounts with commitments became popular with the Bitcoin core devs for privacy reasons I would call that a win for everybody, just across the board.

_**Sarang:**_ All these assets, to some extent are tools to solve certain problems. If you decide that Monero is the correct tool to solve your problem, then by all means, use it. If you end up deciding down the road that something else solves a different problem, or the same problem better, then by all means, go and use that. Our goal is to constantly try to be the best tool available.

_**Surae:**_ Even though I'm sort of a Monero shill and a Bitcoin maximalist, I'm not really a shill or a maximalist for any project because the thing is, even if every single cryptocurrency, if they're doing their job, every single one can function like a bank. It's kind of absurd to look at the world around us and come to the conclusion that there will only be one bank.

_**Sarang:**_ It sometimes seems that way though. When has it ever gone wrong?

_**Surae:**_ I was at the Denver airport and the Illuminati symbols everywhere were absolutely, I mean, I was like the Rothschild or WASPs are watching me right now.

_**Justin:**_ All right, so the next question is a really good one. They ask, what is something that few people, even within the Monero community, do not seem to understand that you wish people had a better knowledge of? It could either be positive or negative, just something that sets Monero apart from different projects. So, I know that Brandon touched on this earlier, but for example in my case, one thing that I really wish people, even in the Monero community, had a better understanding of is the idea of fungibility and how Monero's fungibility is provided by plausible deniability, not perfect privacy. From my view, since we can't have perfect privacy we can't have perfect fungibility either, we can get good enough for it to not matter, so we shouldn't just dismiss fungibility as something you shouldn't worry about as not important. Likewise, we can't say that it's perfect in everyone's case all the time. So here's my example, Brandon, what is one example where you wish people knew a little bit more about Monero?

_**Surae:**_ Monero is not really a technological thing because most people don't know very much about the tech behind Monero. I've talked to people, they might have heard of ring signatures or key images, but even in the cryptocurrency space, our technology is novel compared to some of the stuff in Bitcoin. One thing I do enjoy having to explain to people is the decentralized nature of the Monero project. We are totally non hierarchical and we take that really seriously and it's actually sort of problematic. If I'm speaking to professors at a university, they try to wrap their mind around the governance structure at Monero and they just can't do it because they're coming from this perspective of the university professor and there's deans and provosts above them and there's grad students below them and there's a clear hierarchy. Really what it comes down to is that the Monero community is one of the most democratic communities that I've ever had the joy of experiencing. It seems like almost everyone has a voice and if one person gets shouted down it's because they're being perceived by the majority as being a jerk or as being wrong or being a troll or something along those lines. The lack of structure and the lack of a legal entity behind the Monero community is actually one of the things I have a hard time explaining, even to hardcore Bitcoin people who think that they're all about decentralized, open-source projects.

_**Justin:**_ Thanks Brandon, what about you Sarang?

_**Sarang:**_ For me it comes down to the idea of iterative changes. If anything is clear from the series that we've done so far, I think one important lesson is that there's a very large potential attack and analysis surface to a decentralized digital asset. Especially a decentralized digital asset like Monero who's goal is to work toward privacy and fungibility. What that means is that changes we make to one part of the protocol or the client software for example can have a lot of other effects on other parts of the protocol or client software. What that often means is what might seem like a fantastic fix or change might have other impacts that are either understood to be not so good or that are fairly poorly understood. As a result, a lot of what we do for the changes we make come down to a risk/benefit analysis and trying to determine what the effects of those changes are going to be and whether or not we consider the benefits that they bring to outweigh the downsides. There are a whole lot of things that are on the table that we could do and the number of things that we actually do ends up being a lot smaller in part because of that. And that doesn't mean that we shouldn't continue to strive to do better, that's one of our goals, to always iterate to do better where possible. I wish more people understood the idea that because this is a very large, complex potential attack surface that there are a lot of trade-offs that we have to consider and hopefully we continue to do a good job of analyzing those trade-offs.

_**Justin:**_ Where do the two of you see Monero in five or ten years and what do you think it will take to get there? What changes do you imagine will happen?

_**Sarang:**_ Oh man, I guess what I would like to see personally is for us in the more short-term to do a better job of closing up any remaining bits of metadata that may be floating around. It's impossible to fully remove any elements of metadata, but things like continuing to optimize output selection and looking at transaction relay and network level solutions, being able to make proving systems a bit smaller and more efficient to help space and verification time. In the longer term, like I've always said, moving away from ring signatures and small anonymity sets would be pretty great because a lot of the issues we have surrounding our transaction graph come from the fact that they have a fairly limited anonymity set from ring signatures. That's a very complicated thing to try to move away from, there's a lot of limitations in place because we're not willing to accept things like trusted setups and of course, any solution we would adopt would need to be compatible with the existing protocols so we could get everyone moved over to a new system. I would like to see us there, whether or not that's on the horizon is still an open question.

_**Surae:**_ One of the really interesting things that's happened over the past few years has been an explosion in cryptography research, applied cryptography research. There have been more papers published with novel, zero-knowledge proving systems that are parallelizable and linear and all these nice properties. Basically once a month, I'm finding some new paper that totally blows my mind. So anticipating where we are in five to ten years from now is kind of scary, I feel like we're pretty close to, and I don't want to be one of those futurist, singularity guys, but there is so much stuff coming out that I can't anticipate what next year is going to look like compared to five years from now. I would like to say that I would love personally to see something like Monero's ring signatures replaced with larger scale anonymity set authentication that's closer to ZCash size anonymity sets without violating our efficiency problems. If we can do that, it solves the output selection questions that we were discussing earlier, if people are transmitting their transactions using Tor or something like that then it solves an enormous number of linking metadata issues with blockchain information. Personally, I would like see Monero totally overhauled so that it's as efficient as possible while providing the best scale of default, always on privacy. That's such a tenuous rule, I don't know, two years from now someone might come up with some scheme that's going to rewrite the whole thing. One thing that I find very important about Monero is the human rights component behind the privacy element of Monero, and ZCash also, honestly. These two projects in a lot of places around the world, Venezuala, you know everyone uses Venezuala as an example, but my understanding is that there are a variety of other countries around the world right now that are dealing with inflation issues and tyrannical regimes that are using capital controls to be able to run their people's economies. I think the human rights component of tools like Monero are going to become more and more of an issue over the next five to ten years. I'm not exactly sure where the technology behind Monero is going to be, but I do know that five to ten years from now we're going to having a very large-scale social discussion on privacy and what the everyday citizen should be expecting compared to what the top-level citizens are actually receiving. I personally want to contribute to a bunch of projects that are producing privacy technology that are going to help people five or ten years from now to buy banned books. If you want to buy a copy of the Bible in North Korea than you probably don't want to use a credit card, or the credit system they have over there. I think the human rights component behind Monero is really what's going to be driving discussion over the next couple of years, not so much the technology. That might be a bit of a controversial opinion with this crowd.

_**Justin:**_ I don't have anything personally to add to that, so I think we'll move on to the next question which we sort of covered in answering the previous one. What is something you wish could be improved upon that is not something that you, like if you had the ability to flip a magic switch and have Monero implement immediately, but is still in the middle of achieving community consensus, there might still be some disagreement on the actual implementation. For me personally, I have two things I'd like to talk about. First are payment IDs. I would love to get rid of them, I would love to say to only use subaddresses, let's get rid of them as soon as possible. And the second thing is that I wish, in general, that the Monero community was a little bit more aggressive at banning dumb behavior on the consensus layers much sooner, when it's discovered. So things like prohibiting transaction that only have one output is something we should be much more open about in the Monero community instead of just making it a wallet default. I think Monero is one of the best communities at making these consensus changes, but I wish we were even more aggressive about these small dumb little metadata things that maybe people aren't doing at a large-scale but they shouldn't be doing it at all. Sarang are there any other things that annoy you that you wish you could snap your fingers and have implemented, a Monero Sarang diet fork or whatever it is?

_**Sarang:**_ In general, I agree, I wish we would be more aggressive about making transactions a lot more uniform to the extent that's reasonable, via consensus. Just to ensure that different wallet solutions and different approaches don't end up being potentially detrimental to people's privacy. Besides that, we're still working on potential changes to signature schemes and once those are solid and in place, I wouldn't say that's a controversial thing right now or anything, but I see those solutions possibly improving space scaling and verification times and things that I think could be beneficial. Not world changing or anything, but nice optimizations, I like to optimize.

_**Surae:**_ Speaking of optimizations, Sarang being responsible for 99% speed ups in Bulletproofs is the sort of optimization that he's talking about, it's pretty nuts. What do I wish was different about Monero that I could just snap my fingers and unilaterally change? Rather than answering the question that way, I would answer the question, what am I jealous of in other projects. I'm jealous of Grin's flexibility and their proof-of-work attitudes. The different proof-of-work stuff that's going on with Grin in order to transition from GPU to ASICs over several years with the mining schedule that they use, I find that stuff interesting, and I find Monero's approach to proof-of-work, while also very interesting, I would prefer to do something that transitioning towards ASICs that are commoditized, rather than just trying to hold off the ASICs for as long as possible. But this is a long, on-going conversation and I don't have a solution, otherwise I would write up a proposal and then I would be unilaterally trying to make a change. So that's not really the question is it?/p>

_**Justin:**_ Thank you, those are the main questions that we had come through, so Brandon, you had a few last things that you wanted to leave viewer with that you feel are very important

_**Surae:**_ Well, actually only one of them is important, the other one is very unimportant. The unimportant one was that someone asked what our hobbies are and I was the only one willing to talk about my personal hobby. I love bonsai trees. I love bonsai gardening and it's totally cool to repot a plant and find out that it has 5 foot long roots and you should have repotted it already. It's a fun experience. But the important thing that I wanted to bring up is the [Monero Konferenco](https://monerokon.com/) this June. June 22nd and 23rd in Denver, Colorado we are flying people out from all over the world in order to come talk about Monero and Monero related stuff. We have people from the hardware teams, we have people from venture capitalist firms, we have cryptographers presenting. There is going to be at least two talks at this conference that are going to be historic and groundbreaking, but I can't really talk about them yet. I don't want to hype it too much, but you guys really ought to come, especially considering that tickets are, I mean this is one of the cheapest conferences in town, and by in town, I mean, at all. If you try to go to Consensus in New York you're going to be spending money like crazy, if you want to come out to Denver, it's cheaper to fly to Denver and come to this conference than it is to live locally in New York and go to Consensus./p>

_**Sarang:**_ Brandon, this sounds like a crazy good deal, where can I learn more?

_**Surae:**_ Please go to [monerokon.com](https://monerokon.com/)

_**Sarang:**_ I'll go do that right now Brandon.

_**Surae:**_ Sarang is one of the speakers, honestly guys, I'm super excited about this and I want everyone to come out and have a good time.

_**Justin:**_ Just to give some additional background, one section there is devoted to a breaking Monero topic. Can you speak a little more about that?

_**Surae:**_ Yeah, so the idea is that Breaking Monero is sort of this white hat, black hat, let's discuss frankly the tradeoffs, the broken parts, the things that need to be fixed, the things that could fixed, the things that could be improved about Monero. We have an entire session where people are going to be presenting possibly bad stuff for Monero. This is all in the interest of making Monero better. One of the very first papers I wrote for Monero Research Lab was a criticism of chain reactions and the ring sizes that we added at the time. The best way to make Monero better is to criticize us because first we get all defensive and huffy and then we realize that you're right and we need to make a change. It's going to be a good time, we're going to have a whole session talking about the weaknesses in Monero for Breaking Monero and I hope Justin can come out and moderate that particular session. We'll see if that works out. Oh, and there will be an intercontinental streaming panel that we're collaboratively doing with [Zcon1](https://www.zfnd.org/zcon/) over in Croatia. The ZCash Foundation along with the Monero Community donated to the [Community Crowdfunding System](https://ccs.getmonero.org/) in order to get Monero Konferenco off the ground and we're going to be doing an intercontinental panel about government regulation and privacy. We're going to have folks from CoinCenter, Erik Voorhees from ShapeShift, we're going to have one of the ZCash developers. It's going to be a good time. I'll stop harping on it now.

_**Justin:**_ Wow, what a fantastic offer that you cannot pass up as a viewer. All right, thank you so much to both of you Sarang and Brandon for joining me today for this mailbag episode. Thank you to everyone who submitted those questions, I hope we were able to answer them today during this episode which was unfortunately delayed a good period of time, but we're finally going to be coming out with more Breaking Monero episodes in the future. Thank you for joining us, take care and keep us staying critical of Monero. Bye. 
