# Breaking Monero 13: Blockchain Explorer OpSec 
*06/09/19*  
_**This is a quick reminder to pay attention to the information you give block explorers.**_  

**Breaking Monero Episode 13: Blockchain Explorer OpSec** 

https://youtu.be/_A6k4RQ-uIE  
This is a quick reminder to pay attention to the information you give block explorers. Connecting to them over Tor may not be enough for some threat models. They may not be malicious, but you are giving them the opportunity to collect information about you. Run your own full node instead, and consider running your own block explorer. 

[All Breaking Monero Episodes](https://www.monerooutreach.org/breaking-monero/) 

_**Episode Transcription**_ 

_**Justin:**_ Hello and welcome back to another episode of Breaking Monero. We have a really quick episode for you today on the basics of blockchain explorer opsec. We talked about [remote nodes in episode 7](https://www.monerooutreach.org/breaking-monero/remote-nodes.php) and some of the considerations you should have when using remote nodes. But a lot of people forget about their network connection when they’re using block explorers. So when they’re looking up to see a transaction they’ve made was sent or confirmed by the rest of the network, they’ll often do it without considering what the impact of those are. So today, you have me, Justin and you have Sarang on today to quickly remind you of some of the network limitations you have when talking to a block explorer. I’m going to share my screen to show you going to some of these explorers. Let’s take for example, [xmrchain.net](https://xmrchain.net/), which is one of the most common Monero blockchain explorers. It doesn’t look pretty, but it has all the nice info you’d want in there. If I would put information in about five of my transactions here and search for them and go through them. There’s a good chance, since I’m looking up information about the transaction that I have some connection with it. Now, of course in this case it was literally just the first one that appeared, and I don’t have any connection with it, but if you were going through and doing this by yourself, especially if you were searching for transactions, especially if you were searching for five of your own transactions over a certain time period, this website is able to make a pretty strong association between these. But first, this website gets my IP address and this website also knows that this specific IP address looked up these transactions over this time window. So they have a pretty good idea compared to anyone else in the network that I’m connected to these outputs. Similarly, there are nice front-ends for xmrchain.net like [ExploreMonero.com](https://www.exploremonero.com/) where they have options where you can easily verify your transactions. So you can say “I sent Monero” and fill in the details here, or you can say “I received Monero” and fill in the details here, and this is really usable and it’s nice from that perspective, but just understand that if you say that you’ve received Monero and fill in the details of receiving Monero, this website is going to strongly assume that you are associated with this transaction that you put in there. It will be able to associate with your IP and with the same IP address you’re going to request this several times, say for five transactions, there’s a good chance that ExploreMonero is going to assume that you are associated with all five of those transactions. This is basically a reminder, just simply stating that when you use blockchain explorers that you’re revealing a lot of this information and a lot of people in their haste to learn information about their transactions often forget about this as they’re looking this up. I’m going to toss it back to Sarang, where you can talk about what you can do if you need the information from a block explorer but don’t want to reveal this information, or want to use a block explorer in a way that better protects your network metadata.

_**Sarang:**_ Sure, just to start with, we’re not saying that these particular examples of block explorers actually track or otherwise attempt to go out of their way to log this information. It’s just a reminder that anything you do on the internet, the receiving server knows your IP, whether or not it’s your IP or you’re routing it through something else and they know the details of the query you’ve made. And this is no exception, but of course a lot of folks use Monero, and attempt to do so privately, so it’s important to keep that in mind. Some things you can do of course, you can use [Tor](https://www.torproject.org/) for example, to route your traffic elsewhere so your personal IP is not known to the receiving server. You can use a VPN that you trust, you could make a particular query using the VPN. At that point of course, you’re basically offloading the trust of knowing your IP address and give some information about the query to your VPN provider, so it depends on your trust relationship with them. But as Justin was saying, even using some of those solutions, for example, if I route through a VPN, and I go on xmrchain.net or another block explorer, and I make queries about five or ten different transactions, if that all happens in quick succession and the IP that they see for that is the exact same, the person or entity running that block explorer might make an association between those transactions even if they don’t have particular information that would link it back to me individually since I’m routing my traffic. Again, I have no indication that these sites actually do this, but it’s important to keep in mind that they could do that. If you do want to do multiple queries, one thing you could do is try to use different browser sessions from different IP routings if possible. Depending on your situation and your particular network setup it would reduce the amount of information that the receiving server would be able to get. The best solution, of course, as with many things, is to run your own node locally. So if you run your own node locally, you have the entire synched blockchain and get new blocks and transactions as they come in, and you can simply query locally. If you trust your own node and your own computer that you’re running, which we hope you do, then you’re going to be ok. You won’t be leaking that sort of information out. It’s also worth knowing that even if you don’t necessarily want to use particular command line solutions, or particular local wallets that are running along side your own node, the source code for most of these block explorers is available and typically open-source. So you could always run your own locally web based block explorer that connects to and queries information from your own node. If you like a particular kind of explorer and the source code is available you could run it on your own node and get the same front-end functionality you’re used to but without leaking that information elsewhere.

_**Justin:**_ All right, thanks Sarang. This is basically a reminder for you that blockchain explorers are no exception when you a leaking network metadata, so we just wanted to have this nice, quick episode with you all to share this information with you so that if your threat model covers these sorts of situations you probably should be doing local queries instead of relying on someone else to query for you. All right, that’s all that Sarang and I have for you today, thanks for watching this episode of Breaking Monero and take care.


