Thank you. How does this work with the queue? Oh, yeah.

Hello everyone, I'm Matthias from the [RIAT Institute](https://riat.at/) and because I have a little bit of a jet lag I decided also to put my slides online so you can possibly download them because I'm also, I'll also be referring to a lot of texts and other things that I was previously writing.

How does that work actually? Oh, okay.

Yeah, so just to brief introduce myself my name is Matthias Tarasiewicz or "parasew" as I'm called an IRC. I'm working as a research design and technology communicator and I have a background in computer science, hardware hacking, and design. And I'm also director of the RIAT Institute, it's an NGO operating in Austria. We are working, mainly in, trying to bring privacy technology to the people and also do a lot of educational programs and we work a lot with hardware as well. So open hardware is one of our key topics. And I'm also board member of the [Open Source Hardware Association](https://www.oshwa.org/). So when I also contextualize my talk a little bit with all Monero open hardware.

So I'm also running the Monero meetup in Austria and I'm also co-organizing the Critical Decentralization Cluster at the Chaos Computer Club annual Chaos Communication Congress, so actually I will talk about that a little bit later.

So how does it work actually? It's that trick with that, okay, yeah.

So, again to stress the fact that I have a little bit with jet lag. So all my slides are online and I will be referring also to a few books, for example, to this recent book that is also now available online, it's called, "Openism — Conversations on Open Hardware", and this was a book that explains a little bit how we work also in the Institute. So we interview a lot of technologies people working with technology. This is also how we learn and understand the methods of the research of the people involved. In this case of the Openism book, we have been interviewing a lot of people that are active in the open hardware scene and that are working with different concepts of open-sourcing hardware because it's not an easy task, I will explain a little bit later.

So my talk is called Critical Decentralisation, Open and Libre Hardware for and with Monero, and my structure of the talk is that I will talk a little bit about critical decentralization, what is that term? I will talk about hardware hacking and devise liberation as methods for technological literacy, and I will make sure to a little bit, make sure that you understand what are the limits and challenges that are in the open-source hardware space because it's not that easy to open source hardware, it's not the same as with software and it's very challenging. And I will also try to figure out and explain what it is relevant to the larger Monero landscape.

So first of all to spend a bit critical decentralization, the term, because we have been organizing this kind of crypto table. It started like a very small thing that was actually, five years ago introduced at the Chaos Communication Congress which is a kind of a hacker Congress a approximately as large as the DEF CON, not that big but I would say it's quite large. So 20,000 people come there every year and we started with a small table, and the last year, together with the Monero community we could organize a very large cluster which was actually 150 seats so people were actually working there doing workshops. It's actually different assemblies that were meeting there and working there. Mostly are from different open hardware projects but also Monero project with rehrar there and seen on the stage. So it was kind of amazing. So there were a lot of programs there. It will actually happen again this year and in this context, this term of critical decentralization came up and was like actively discussed and debated by us.

So this is how it looked, it's a little bit sketchy and drafty and looks very much like it is there, so you have a lot of tables with a lot of people working there for a week.

And to explain a little bit why this term Critical Decentralization is important to me, so, I think, that the whole hardware debate and hardware itself, and a problem that we have these days is, lies within the devices we are using, so. I think there's a lot of loss of control on the user side that basically makes it kind of a problem, and decentralization cannot really move forward because we're losing the ability to understand our devices around us.

So I'm referring to this book, I know it's an older book, and you might already know it, it's from Jonathan Zittrain who basically described that "customers have been shifting from generative to tethered technologies because of perceived security issues", what does Zittrain mean with that. So he distinguishes between generative and tethered technologies. So generative technologies would be the early internet or Wikipedia somehow unregulated and in a way you have these [inaudible] is that would be for example the Apple App Store or something like end-to-end control of services but also enforced by devices. That means these tethered devices are also taking away a lot of properties that you would want as a user, for example, the iPhone, you cannot replace the batteries so easy so the whole repair process is basically only possible through the vendor. So the problem is you're getting dragged away like —all these kinds of properties that you had with hardware that you were used to I was used to because I was able to repair my devices and use them around me at all times—, they are taken away from you. So in a way, this creates this kind of tethered devices or tethered appliances, how Zittrain calls it.

And Zittrain also continues to say that these kind of lock devices are also changing and he refers also to the good old times, so to say when this was not the case. In a time when people were more actually tinkering with their devices. And this actually reminds me of the situation we found in the 60s and 70s when basically computers were delivered and the whole manufacturing process was made for enthusiasts, for tinkers. So this you would buy computers parts that you would actually assemble yourself. The first computer that was really a preassemble was the Altair 8800 in 1975 and the Apple I versus the Apple II is also a very good explanation of that. So while the Apple I was a kind of a device you had to basically assemble yourself the Apple II was coming preassembled.

Why is this interesting and why is this relevant in this whole context? Because these devices actually started the micro computing revolution. The microcomputing revolution was insofar important as it introduced also the first availability of cryptography. So you had the ciphers DES and RSA Diffie-Hellman key exchange which actually enabled this kind of crypto dream, how Arvin Naranyanan called this, and the question is, like, a lot is it's kind of a nice story when you think this kind of technologies become available. So you have all these cycles when technologies become available and in a way, they get regulated. So you have this kind of situation where this also happened, of course, in the microcomputing revolution and also the availability of cryptography because we had the Crypto Wars of the 1990s.

If you're interested in this topic more I wrote a chapter in a book about that which is called, "Faceless praxis in the age of zero trust: strategies of disappearance and distributed pseudonymity in art and research". It's actually linked and you can also download it, it's a very long text explaining a little bit about the cultural implications of macro computing and also what the specific devices that were actually in play.

And I want to actually make a point here because I wanted to make the point also with this book from Zittrain that closed devices reduce technological literacy. That's also what Zittrain basely points at. And these devices cannot be repaired anymore so basically you lose something. So you lose some ability you had before.

And in a way all these kind of terms and all this kind of makey and makery attempts, the maker culture was really on the rise and we always hear that makers can solve a lot of problems that it will actually save our planet and they will do a lot of things. It's basically criticized a lot from all the different angles, even within the maker community itself. So you have this term, critical making, and I like this text from, all this text collection and book from Garnet Herts, a lot. He's making this taxonomy and distinctions between three different approaches of makers, so he distinguishes between a utilitarian DIY and material constraint and pleasures or hedonized practice.

So most of the maker momentum and maker movement would actually work out of a hedonized practice. And, why am I telling you all this? Because this is important. Because these are the target audiences for open hardware these are the people that will buy your devices if you are an open hardware person trying to sell or monetize or distribute an open hardware project.

So, oops, I was pressing the wrong button here.

Devices, yeah. So the right to repair is that something that's actually taken away from you these days, and this is actually also a political thing in the US, so, I don't know if you're aware of that but there's this right to repair movement on [repair.org](https://www.repair.org/). So it's really, and I was recently reading up that you have this kind of right of repair with cars. So they can give you card to any repair person but basically, and you can even repair it yourself but this gets also like taken away from you. But with specific devices with all these kinds of tailored appliances is not possible anymore, you cannot repair your iPhone, you cannot repair your MacBook, I mean you could, but you will basically void the warranty and stuff like that. So there's a huge movement especially in the US which actually understands that it's also an economic force on economic possibility in order to make this kind of repairability, again thing. So this is also something which is a key property of open hardware. You can actually repair these things you have the documentation you can repair however you want and you can actually learn again.

So, I'm also referring here to a very interesting text from a South American researcher who was writing about Gambia, a repair culture. It's also very critical approach so this was a kind of a group that started to grab like old computers and like repair them and then give them to like social causes. So I liked it a lot. There's a lot of like different repair cultures now which are on the rise. And I'm also telling you this because repair is also a way how you gain specific knowledge and how you can actually learn because this is actually, these days, of thinking about the hardware, this is a way how you learn about these things because these things are also heavily protected and you won't possibly find out anything without reverse engineering.

So, repairing is a way to gain technological literacy. The so-called repair knowledge. And reverse engineering is an essential part to regain control over devices, and also to learn. And I want to, in this context, also refer to some more, to a book that was actually very important to me, and also to understand and to learn like how this reverse engineering process is happening, it's called, "The Hardware Hacker, Adventures in making and breaking hardware", from Andrew "bunnie" Huang. And I love this quote from him he says, "Without the right to think and explore we risk becoming enslaved by technology; and the more we exercise the right to hack, the harder it will be to take that right away". So I'm bearing in mind that you might download this if you found this interesting. I also put a few links inside and some easter eggs in the PDF.

So from Reverse Engineering to Device Liberation, there is a step in between. But we have to understand that reverse engineering is a necessary way in order to understand how machines work, how devices function because often you don't know how these things are actually, they're not documented, you want to get new knowledge, you want to gain new knowledge, you want to actually possibly, read, purpose this specific device you have to reverse engineer.

So this is a good example, in my opinion, explaining the process from reverse engineering to open hardware. So this is a very interesting, in my opinion, community that started reappropriating cameras, in this case, it was Canon cameras, like, normal photographic cameras, consumer cameras. And this group started to —it's called the Canon Hack Development Kit— this guy started to look at the firmware reverse-engineer the functionality of the camera and then reproduce another firmware so that you would be able to create like raw video or other functionalities of that hardware.

This is a very interesting aspect here because this is not the only project so hardware hacking with cameras and firmware modification of cameras is a very common case. A lot of people do it because you can actually gain a lot of features out of these devices and they are usually very costly —so professional cameras are very costly— and usually, they're just limited by their firmware. So you can totally crank the devices.

And there's another example which is maybe more common, [Magic Lantern](https://magiclantern.fm/). This was a specific firmware hack in order to make the Canon DSLR cameras able to record raw video. So the raw sensor data it's a more elaborate project already and this kind of alternative firmware hacks for this repurposing of hardware is a kind of a common practice. You find this a lot also in specific audio cultures and interestingly a lot in not maintain firmware anymore. So in Europe, for example, there was a movement now trying to force the producers of hardware to maintain the firmware longer because of course as a consumer at some stage you cannot use these devices anymore. So a lot of people started to reverse engineer the hardware because they wanted to still be able to use the devices.

So I wanted to also point to another project here which is in the camera domain, I was working with this project, and there's a talk about this project also from the 32C3 which is the Chaos Communication Congress, back in the days I think it was 2013 or something. So this is an attempt and actually, it's quite a far project already to completely and fully open-hardware and open-source a camera, a professional video camera, excluding the sensor of course because that's also an important property to understand from open-hardware, it cannot be fully open, you will always have some proprietary elements in there because you cannot produce specific elements yourself. You will have specific elements that are copyrighted, that are patented, it's very complex, and you have to deal with that, that's the first thing you have to deal with.

So this kind of device liberation creates necessary technological literacy for open-source hardware. That's, in my opinion, very important to understand because, without this kind of information that is usually very very strongly protected, you wouldn't even know what to look for, you wouldn't even know what to design because this all this kind of information is hidden. So this also comes from a strong DIY culture, especially the video stuff I was showing, and I wanted to also hear a little bit describe what open-hardware is exactly, what kind of degrees of openness exist in this kind of devices in this kind of approaches?

So this is a very good book if you want to get started it's called, "Building Open Source Hardware", and it's written by Alicia Gibb. There's also a lot of other contributions in there which deal with the legal implications with the documentation implications with all sorts of things. I can give a brief overview about what open hardware is that we are talking about the same thing and actually I'm talking about open source hardware because there's already a differentiation between open-source hardware and open hardware.

So hardware per itself is born open. Important here Michael Weinberg who was writing in this book about the legal implications of open hardware. So what does that mean, born open? It means that this open-source hardware is fundamentally different than software because as software, basically falls under the copyright law, basically hardware doesn't because hardware falls on the patent law, that means it's actually considered a useful article. Something, things that do stuff are basically you have to patent it, you cannot really make sure that this is like not copied from someone else. That sounds like a limitation but it's not really because you have to just deal with it. It's basically, there are other ways how people try to make sure that their hardware isn't kind of stolen or like repurposed or sold. So a very good example is the original case where there are trademarking the term and then you print the trademark everywhere and basically, people would actually identify that with your hardware. But basically, they cannot really save any more than that.

There is a few other approaches which are outlined on the lower part of the screen which is the [TAPR license](https://tapr.org/the-tapr-open-hardware-license/) which is from amateur radio community in the US. Then you have the [CERN open hardware license](https://cern-ohl.web.cern.ch/home) and for open science open hardware makes total sense because you have to somehow reproduce and make sure that these kinds of measurements you made with open hardware are in a way reproducible.

So CERN is running the [The Large Hadron Collider](https://home.cern/science/accelerators/large-hadron-collider). It's the largest open hardware project. All of the devices, they are storing the data from the Large Hadron Collider are basically open hardware. And they produce a lot of data and still, also they are struggling with finishing or like making sure that all parts are in a way kind of savable or like completely describable so that the second draft of the CERN open hardware license is now being drafted. And I'm much in favor of the [GPLv3](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html) so you can also go with Richard Stallman. If you want to actually make sure that your open hardware is in a way protected but also it or at least it's as far protected that if somebody does something and extend your designs, that it has to be GPL as well. So here, I mean, you can read it yourself I will actually quote him here, "For instance, a circuit, as a topology, cannot be copyrighted (and therefore cannot be copylefted)". So that's exactly what I told before with [inaudible]. It's a problem because copyright only basically applies to artistic work and if and not too useful or like things that do stuff, "Definitions of circuits written in HDL can be copyrighted (and therefore copylefted), but the copyleft covers only the details of expression of the HDL code, not the circuit topology it generates. Likewise, a drawing or layout of a circuit can be copyrighted, so it can be copylefted, but this only covers the drawing or layout, not the circuit topology. Anyone can legally draw the same circuit topology in a different-looking way, or write a different HDL definition that produces the same circuit." It's another good example of how it's actually lost cause to try to protect these things. It's actually better to deal with the fact that people steal it, it's good.

So I want to give a few more tangible examples that are more relatable to Monero because I wanted to also make a little bit more, bring a little bit more clarity in this kind of open hardware debate because we're looking into a lot of different open hardware projects also that are working with and working with Monero and the larger crypto scape. And people don't really understand the basic differences between open-source software and open-source hardware. So I hope I didn't bored you and maybe all of you knew already these facts but I had to really explain it again.

So a few examples and here I picked three different hardware wallets. They're just to also related maybe to the last talk. So we have the [Trezor](https://trezor.io/) with the [BitBox](https://shiftcrypto.ch/) and the [Ledger](https://www.ledger.com/). They are very very different ways how they are basically marketed. So here you see not actually the open hardware part of it here you see the final product. So the Trezor, for example, is open-source hardware, we know that. We have to BitBox which is for example open-source software and it has an HSM module. Then with the Ledger absolute closed source. I think the apps are open source or something like that.

But these things here, what you see is the developer kit and this is actually how open hardware is targeted. So that's how the product looks that you would actually, as an open hardware developer, deliver to the makers or to your first batch of like developers that will actually develop these things. So we're not looking at basically this kind of polished product we're looking at drafty things that people work with. And I wanted to give another good example because I think it's a very important example, in relationship to libre hardware because we have all these kind of different differentiations about what and how open hardware can be so there's like open hardware but there's like this one more step which is called libre hardware. So with WiFi routers is a best-practice example. And I wanted to give this example of the Linksys WRT54G, which is the best selling router of all times, according to some sources.

So basically, this is an important router because it basically made this open firmware system open, WRT, possible. So it was possible because Linksys had built the original firmware on the GPL and so basically they have to open-source the whole thing. So people started to completely reverse engineer other routers and now it's a really large product. So I think they have like over 800 supported routers. It's a really large community looking only at the firmware so they're not even designing the routers themselves, they're just remodifying, and like reappropriating the firmware. And that's very important to understand. This is actually an even maybe larger community than even hardware designers because it's actually a very very long-lasting task and it's very expensive to build hardware, to deliver hardware, and all these kind of things.

So this is a good example in so far also because the [Turris Omnia](https://www.turris.com/en/), I don't know if you know this router, is a very polished product, this is an open-source router from the Czech Republic, and this is basically also running open WRT. So these are some modules you can extend it, it's a very nice example. Some routers are really nice in my opinion because you can see from 2004 until now, like how these things developed and they have all these kinds of different properties of open hardware.

Here's a very good example, this is libreCMC it's a firmware project that works without binary blobs. So the idea is, is there something more open than open? Yes, there is because if all the drivers would be, if you have the source of all the drivers you can basically check what they are doing and most of the firmware these days comes with [inaudible] binary blobs. So you can't really check what's happening, for example, this is really a huge issue in the open hardware space because a lot of the manufacturers don't give away of course the source code, so you have to deal with all this kind of binary blobs at all times.

So there is this one license, certification sorry, which is called the [FSF Respect Your Freedom Certification](https://ryf.fsf.org/) and this is from the Free Software Foundation. I'm a really big fan of that because they really look into what the user can do with hardware, in the end. And basically, there's a lot of interesting Monero related or like, let's say, crypto-related open hardware that has this kind of Free Software Foundation certification. So because we heard about random number generators before and there is existing really nicely produced random number generators that work on any device and that are even libre hardware, so you can see, "okay, what's happening there?", you can learn, you can rebuild it, you can even create your own extra entropy devices, you can put additional centers inside. So that's existing and that's a really good starting point if you want to dig in, dig deep into open hardware and libre Hardware scene.

This is another good example, it's the Respects Your Freedom, FSF, kind of remodel devices, X200 laptop from IBM and its old hardware but this is actually considered to be the last hardware that runs without the Intel management engine enabled. Which means basically, hardcore cryptographers, like people that really want to make sure that their hardware aren't compromised will actually use this kind of old, older devices because it's actually in a way working with [Libreboot](https://libreboot.org/). So there's the [inaudible] Libreboot debate, I'm not sure how much it's like common knowledge, but looking at other devices from the crypto space that are like not that interesting but not FSF licensed.

So we have Nitrokey which is a kind of an open hardware replacement for the Yubikey two-factor authentication device but it has a little bit extra features. It's really nicely produced but it's not completely satisfied under the FSF - Respect Your Freedom certification. And Purism hardware. A lot of people use that, I think, also a lot of Monero people use Purism. Is also not FSF Respects Your Freedom certified. And the question is why? There's a very interesting debate on the Libreboot mailing list, basically, the problem is the intel management engineering. This kind of back door is a kind of sort of back door people try to basically remote shutdown machines through the internal management engine. There are some existing exploits and basically, it's not considered a completely secure device, every Intel CPU starting from 2008.

So basically since we locked in into this kind of AMD or Intel or ARM devices, we don't know what they run, and basically, everything out 2008 is a kind of chance that there is something happening in the background.

So in able to conclude here, so I think Monero is already empowering a lot of best practices, a lot of people, and is showing a lot of best practices in security and privacy but I suggest a strong and endorse libre technologies such as the FSF Respects Your Freedom certified hardware. I think people should actually know that privacy is a process and you need to actually actively look into what kind of hardware you use as well. So in my opinion hardware is very unsafe. So in order to have a complete private and anonymous workflow, that means it's actually key management everything, possible without another wallet, should be, if there is a technological device included, taken into account and there should be possibly some kind of endorsements which kind of hardware to use. So I see a lot of people who don't know exactly what kind of hardware to choose. It's my opinion important to also as Monero project define that or like at least give a few endorsements.

And I also think we should reverse engineer existing hardware more in order to find out if they're matching on and fitting in our security properties and security protocol. And I wanted to briefly also mention two things because, this is interesting, my time is over right?

Yeah, so you know.

Yeah, yeah, yeah okay. So this is one thing that we are actively looking at RIAT currently. It's the [Risk-V](https://riscv.org/) open-source processor instruction set specification. There are a few development boards built on Risk-V and ninety percent of the packages from Debian are already ported into Risk-V which is in my opinion very interesting. Risk-V as the hardware itself is still in its infancy but at soon you can run Linux to the device you can do a lot of things actually with it. Still, on performance-wise you have to tweak a little bit but I'm currently very interested in the [Keystone Open Framework for Architecting Trusted Execution Environments](https://keystone-enclave.org/), where you can actually test and create a lot of interesting crypto features into like hardware. And basically, you can emulate the whole production process on your machine you don't need the hardware. So that's, in my opinion, an interesting direction the whole Monero hardware could go, Monero hardware team could go. There's still a long way to go and I think we should still also see what kind of other options we have in and using secure hardware.

I just also, and this my final slide I promise, wanted to point a few upcoming happenings where we are all meeting and we're and there's also something happening. So I wanted to point out the [Hackers Congress Paralelni Polis](https://chaos.hcpp.cz/) which will be in Prague in October. Also in October, there will be the [Open Hardware Month](https://www.oshwa.org/). Open Hardware Month means that there will be like open hardware events all over the place, all over the planet. I think there's a lot of happenings in the US and in Berlin, it will be like a bigger event and a lot of projects will actually also communicate their findings and their projects.

And there will also be again at the Critical Decentralisation Cluster at Chaos Communication Congress at lab tick cross computer Club. You can find more information in decentral.community and yeah, I hope to see you there or any of these other things. Thank you so much.

[applause]

Everybody, thank you again, Mattias. Does anybody have any questions real quick before Mattias sits down? Yes sir.

Given that we are actually in the United States and that this called lockdown Hardware started with a Digital Millennium Copyright Act in 1998. Would you like to comment of the impact of that and the role of firmware that is locked down with DRM or technology for protection measures? And yes, for sake of argument we're talking about criminal penalties or about 10 years in jail or a million-dollar fine, for breaking DRM.

Yeah, sure. I mean this is a problem of course this is a problem in terms of like, from a producer side this is insane. And I hope this doesn't affect developers —of course, it does because I recently also read that if you are doing like a cryptographic consulting in the US you need some export license or something like that. So it's like insane but I can say that because I'm not American and I can export my crypto.

I'll keep my opinion to myself, again thank you Matthias from RIAT.

[applause]
