Baldet: Oh, hi. So, we're live on the internet right now, that's exciting for everyone I'm sure. So were here cross country, and cross-conference between [Zcon1](https://clovyr.io/about) in Croatia and [MoneroKon](https://Monerokon.com/) in Denver to discuss the regulatory and advocacy environment for privacy-preserving cryptocurrencies. We have a full 90 minutes for this conversation, so we're going to spend the first hour digging deep into some of the issues and then the next 30 doing Q&A. I'm going to throw over to Denver to do their intros and then they can hand back and we'll attempt to do the same. 

Sarang: Alright, that's fantastic. So hello to everyone over in Zcon, remotely, and everyone here in Denver for the Monero first annual, hopefully, annual Konferenco. Here on our end, we have me moderating this, my name is Dr. Sarang Noether and I am one of the full-time researchers with Monero Research Lab conducting research on behalf and for the Monero project, and we're very very pleased to have our two panels on our end, Jerry Brito from [Coin Center](https://www.Coin Center.org/), and also Erik Voorhees from [ShapeShift](https://ShapeShift.com/). If they would like to take a brief couple of minutes and kind of introduce themselves the way they see fit, and why they see themselves here, and why they're interested in this space.

Brito: Sure, so I'm the Executive director of Coin Center, Coin Center is an independent non-profit based in D.C. and we're focused on the public policy issues that affect cryptocurrencies and open permission-less blockchain networks, and a big focus for us is privacy, and electronic cash. And so I'm very happy to be here really engaging with the Monero community. And, I'll just say that on the other end, we have another person from Coin Center at Zcash. So we're very happy to be able, as Coin Center, to be on both sides of the Atlantic on this. 

Voorhees: Hey everyone, my name is Erik Voorhees. I'm the founder and CEO of ShapeShift and been part of this crypto craze since 2011. Back then, oh they're not hearing me.

Baldet: We lost audio.

Voorhees: Do you hear me? And/or not the others.

Gavigan: We lost audio guys.

Valkenburgh: It was all going so well.

Sarang: Can you hear me, can you hear me, with what I'm saying right now? Nope nothing, still nothing, still nothing.

Voorhees: Damn NSA.

[laughter]

Baldet: He doesn't know who Erik Voorhees is though really.

Voorhees: Testing, testing.

Gavigan: Shall we continue with this and hope that the audio issues resolve?

Voorhees: This is going to be awkward because if we continue in our end they'll hear us and we won't hear them. [laughter]. We can hear you guys over there.

Gavigan: Okay.

Valkenburgh: Okay.

Baldet: Okay, so I'm going, great, okay. So, I'm Amber Baldet I'm co-founder and CEO of [Clovyr](https://clovyr.io/about), I'm also on the [World Economic Forum's](https://www.weforum.org/) blockchain advisory and the board of the [Zcash Foundation](https://www.zfnd.org/). With me, we have Jack Gavigan and Peter Van Valkenburgh, who I will also let introduce themselves.

Gavigan: I am Jack Gavigan, I work with the [Electric Coin Company](https://electriccoin.co/), the company behind [Zcash](https://z.cash/) and I lead regulatory relations for the company.

Valkenburgh: I'm Peter Van Valkenburgh, I'm director of research at Coin Center, the organization that Jerry is the executive director of, so I write a lot of our regulatory comments, I've gotten to testify before congress a couple times, usually opposite strangely angry economists from [NYU](https://www.nyu.edu/), and I'm also a board member of the [Zcash Foundation](https://www.zfnd.org/).

Baldet: And a quick housekeeping note for this room only, you'll see some white cards in front of you. We're going to do Q&A by having you write down any questions that strike you over the next hour and towards the end we'll just pass them over towards the side of the room, and collect them and do it that way so. Okay, so we're going to begin by discussing the regulatory landscape and I will throw back to Sarang.

Sarang: Alright excellent, and just a brief housekeeping note for the Denver side of things, if anyone in our audience has any questions that they would like to kinda present later on, please raise your hand and one of our assistants will hand you a notecard, please write the question down and then they will bring the notecards to me, and then we can ensure that we're efficiently answering high-quality questions. So, the first question that I'll ask over here is going to be initially directed toward Jerry here, and the question here is, what are some of the main differences around the world in how different societies views might manifest themselves in privacy regulations? Both now and in the future.

Brito: Okay, how different societies views might manifest themselves?

Sarang: Right, I mean, we see, we hear a lot of things from different countries for example about what the regulatory landscape looks like, or might look like? And I'm wondering how the views of those different societies might manifest themselves, how those regulations might come about? 

Brito: Peter is freaking me out because he keeps laughing, and now we can't hear you, great [laughs]. So listen, I mean when you talk about law in the abstract like that it's very difficult, you have to talk a little bit more concretely about what law you're talking about, and typically when you're talking about privacy, you're either talking about consuming privacy, or you're talking about anti-money-laundering type of regulation. And on the anti-money-laundering side which probably is the most on-point, there really isn't much difference, you know, in the world, and actually just this week we saw [FATF](https://www.fatf-gafi.org/), which is a global intergovernmental organization that makes up all of the different financial intelligence units come out with recommendations to again, try to harmonize across the globe what the law is, so there really isn't a whole lot of difference. I think where differences emerge is not so much on the privacy side, but it's going to be related to how the sanctions, really, right, and different countries are going to have different views on sanctions and how appropriate they are, so.

Sarang: Yeah I mean do you have any comments on the same question Erik?

Voorhees: Probably one thing that's very difficult, especially for any companies operating in this world, is that even within any particular jurisdiction, it's not always clear, and which jurisdictions apply to which kind of business activities is itself a very complicated matrix of decisions. And so what you end up having to do if you want to try to be compliant, and you're located in more than one country, is sort of a, you know, 20-30% of your business is going toward just trying to navigate the grey area and trying to figure out how that all works. It's horribly counterproductive and it's been a huge difficulty for us. 

Sarang: And just I guess a brief follow up on that, so I mean, we can definitely talk about the FATF recent regulations which are exceptionally new, I mean those came out formally, just what? A couple of days ago. From what you've seen in, you know, based on kind of how these regulations and kind of policy recommendations in an attempt to like you were saying Jerry to kind of unify things around the world, do you see these as overall tending to simplify things for, you know, the industry and folks doing work here, or do you see those as just kind of, you know, being sufficiently vague seeming enough, where it's unclear where these grey areas actually lie, like what Erik was saying?

Brito: No, so the good news, from the FATF, is that the recommendations that they ultimately put out are almost identical to what [FINCEN](https://www.fincen.gov/) has been doing here in the US and what already is law here in the US. And so, two things are good about that, one is that companies operating here in the US don't really have to do anything differently, assuming that they're compliant, it's really meant to bring the rest of the world up to the same standard as the US. So that's one thing and the other thing is that FINCEN's approach here in the US has been very reasonable in our estimation. So number one, you're only affected if you are a custodial firm, if you are accepting and sending funds on behalf of somebody in that period of time you're holding on to funds, you're going to be regulated. And what FINCEN did in recent guidance was clarify very explicitly, if you're non-custodial, you're not subject to regulations, if you're simply a developer of software you're not subject to regulation. They even specify if you are providing decentralized exchange, where you're not taking custody of funds, you are not subject to the regulations. And FATF has adopted something that's basically identical so that's all good news. I would hesitate to say that this simplifies because if you are subject to the rules, it's pretty tough to comply and one thing in particular is tough to comply with is something as known as the travel rule, FATF, which is something that's been a rule in the US forever, exchanges should, and I'm curious to see how ShapeShift might be complying with the travel rule. But the travel rule has applied to the exchanges in the US forever. And now what we're seeing is FATF say, "Every other country in the world needs to adopt the US's travel rule", they call it in the FATF language the wire transfer rule. And basically, what it says is this, is that, if I have an account at Coinbase, which is a US-based regulated, BSA regulated financial institution, and I want to send money to Sarang who's got an account at Kraken, let's say, when I go to Coinbase and say send money over, Coinbase needs to send along with the transaction my name and information and Sarang's name and information to Kraken. And of course, that's almost impossible to comply if what I give Coinbase is simply, you know, say a bitcoin address, and say, "Hey can you send a bitcoin from my account to this bitcoin address". Coinbase has no idea where, you know, who's bitcoin address is this, is something that in banking world is very easy to comply with but in the crypto world, it's not. And so, now that's goint to be the standard around the world. It probably is going to have to mean that they're going to have to be, there's going to have to be a separate channel among exchanges and it's gonna be difficult, I think to comply with.

Voorhees: Yeah, I mean, in our particular model were only sending assets back to a customer, back to the one who sent them to us. So we don't have that issue but it's going to be a huge pain for any kind of exchange because there's no way that they can ever know, you know, even if there's a second level of communications between some of these exchanges, that will preclude new entrants in the market form being able to do that because how do they get into that group, and when and how, and.

Brito: When you say you only send back, what do you do? You always send back to the same address that's sent to you?

Voorhees: No, it's in our terms that you can only send crypto back to yourself.

Gavigan: Okay, I was going to say, imagine a world where we move to a world where exchanges only send back to you, they never send to each other. That actually encourages people to hold their own coins and then send them peer-to-peer to each other. So it's kind of interesting what the effectiveness of the regulation might be.

Sarang: Yeah, I mean, it's definitely going to be interesting to see how, you know, businesses and different kinds of industries evolve to meet some of these new regulations as they kind of get flushed out. 

Brito: Can I suggest something, maybe, I don't know maybe this is outside the script but Peter is an expert on BSA and FATF, so maybe he has something to say to add to this.

Sarang: Yeah, I mean, if you would like to go ahead and jump in I think would be fine.

Valkenburgh: About what's coming next? I'm sorry I can't hear your audio.

Baldet: About FATF question what we're going to talk about later.

Gavigan: What does FATF mean?

[laughter][inaudible]

Sarang: Yes, yes Jerry had a question kind of passing back to Peter if that's alright.

Baldet: It's fine, I guess what we were going to discuss was simply sharing all this customer data when fulfilling customer transactions down the chain might extend also to personal wallet management even, so how might that impact, how individuals even have to know about and engage with that kind of a law?

Valkenburgh: Which law are we talking about?

Baldet: We're talking about the Financial Action Task Force.

Valkenburgh: Taskforce, ok the recommendations...

Gavigan: And the travel rule, Peter.

Baldet: The travel rule.

Valkenburgh: Oh, well the best thing about the travel rule, from a standpoint of an individual and users, is that the travel rule only applies to regulated entities. In the US BSA regulated entities and for the European equivalent of the US travel rule i.e. the wire transfer rule, in FATF's recommendations, VASP's or Virtual Asset Service Providers, as defined in the, in the newly defined term in the glossary that FATF released, just two days ago. And those definitions as I think Jerry was saying at his end, although I couldn't hear, are entirely focused on people who actually have at least transient custody of other person's virtual currency, and that means that even if someone is perhaps writing wallet software that's like a multi-sig wallet, and even if they are holding say one out of three keys in a multi-sig smart contract, they don't have custody, and FINCEN was quite clear about this fact in their guidance that was released last May, and we were a little bit concerned that maybe the FATF wouldn't follow suit, in particular, because the United Kingdom began a consultation to implement its money laundering laws under the European union's 5th money laundering directive, and suggested that we know that the, so this is me parroting the UK now, we know that the FATF is about to release its recommendations, and we know that they may want us to go beyond the EU money laundering directive and regulate more parties. And in that UK consultation, they said, "Maybe we should extend the scope of money laundering obligations", in other words, people will have to know their customers to open source software developers, to persons facilitating decentralized exchange, and they had a couple of things on the list. And so while we didn't participate actively in the FATF recommendations because from our understanding of them they were going to be just fine, when the UK mentioned that they were effectively using the FATF recommendations as a sort of justification for going further we said, "Okay well, we definitely need to participate in the UK's consultation", about how they implement 5MLD, and what we did was we wrote a pretty comprehensive comment to the UK arguing that this would be a departure from US policy under FINCEN, so you'd be going well beyond US standards, it would be impractical entirely for people to comply with, like, which open-source developer in the Monero repositories or in the Zcash Github repositories or in the bitcoin core repositories is obligated to know all the people that use all these networks? It's hard to even know what that would mean or how that would work. And we also argued that it would be effectively unconstitutional, according to the sort of unwritten UK constitution, which is, you know, a deep and long-standing respect for the rule of law, you don't have a written one, Jack.

Gavigan: Well, much like Bitcoin's protocol, right?

Valkenburgh: It's true, no specification, just a thing that's running. Usually running [laughter]. And also in violation of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the European Convention on Human Rights. For a couple of different reasons, primarily if you start mass surveilling people who use cryptocurrency by mandating that the authors of the software bake surveillance into the code, you're really doing the most insidious and complete bulk collection of data that you can imagine. This isn't collection from an entity who's established a customer relationship with somebody, opened an account for them, and is on some level of face-to-face interaction, this is surveillance simply because you chose to install some software on your computer. That would be a radical departure. And aside from that which are sort of 4th amendment concerns in the US, and concerns with the similar articles in the international covenants where you should have specific specificity with respect to who you're surveilling, you can't do blanket surveillance, that's a general tenant of the 4th amendment —and you can make these arguments with respect to international covenants on human rights— aside from those, 4th amendment like arguments, there's also the first amendment and the free speech equivalence in international law and European law. Which is, assuming that people don't want to comply with this rule and bake surveillance into the software that they write —and I think it's right to assume that a lot of people in this room would be very vehemently in favor of not complying and for the right reasons—, assuming people don't wanna comply, could you compel them to comply? Could you say you must write code this way? That gets into a matter of compelled speech and if you don't comply, can you actually ban the publication and distribution of the source code? As it travels through the internet in the UK? Or in the US for that matter, and I think the answer is pretty unequivocally no. There are limits to your free speech rights but this would be, I think extremely overbroad as far as quashing legitimate speech that is non-criminal, and so laws that do restrict speech need to be narrowly tailored to achieve the results that are desired by policymakers. And a law that says, "No you just can't share cryptocurrency software anymore", it's not narrowly tailored because sure it might stop a crime, or bad things that you want to stop, it also going to stop innumerable legitimate use-cases for this technology, chief among them being a bulwark against totalitarianism and corporate data collection. Which are things that I think liberal democracy should be very much in favor of and learn to love rather than fear. So we sent that comment into the UK, I've sort of gone backwards in explaining some of it, we first wrote a paper about the constitutional arguments as they would be made in the US context under the 4th and first amendments, so the European comments or the UK comments was sort of based on that paper. So if the constitutional arguments about why forcing developers or persons who are non-custodial with respect to people virtual currency, while forcing those people to collect information about their users is unconstitutional, if those arguments are interesting to you I definitely recommend picking up our recently published report on [Electronic cash, Decentralized Exchange, and the Constitution](https://www.coincenter.org/electronic-cash-decentralized-exchange-and-the-constitution/), it's available on the Coin Center website. 

Baldet: So where we have some regulation pushing towards ever more aggressive disclosure? And at the same time we have a growing climate of public concern about privacy and more regulation coming forward to attempt to mandate data privacy laws and how things are collected and controlled. They're all coming from an agency that don't necessarily speak to each other in jurisdictions with different kind of personalities. So are we headed towards a climate where these things start to bump up against and potentially conflict with each other or is it inherent that finance and data will always stay in their own lanes? 

Valkenburgh: So I mean, I think we're already seeing lots of bumping up against each other the EU's GDPR, is a very different way of looking at privacy and regulation than what we have in the US. The easiest way to just point that out briefly is that the GDPR really doesn't protect you from searches from governments, at all. Is like a giant loophole or a carve out or just wasn't the goal of the thing, the goal of the thing was to keep European data on European servers and prevent American companies from exploiting it outside of European laws, it had nothing to do with protecting European citizens from their own governments. And that's a very American perspective of me to express because in America we're strangely comfortable, maybe recently with the interest that Congress is showing in Facebook and other big tech companies, but generally speaking that aside, were strangely comfortable usually with corporate data collection and extraordinarily wary of government surveillance. And so our privacy laws to the extent we have them, are really all constitutional arguments, and the difference between just an ordinary statutory law and constitutional law, broadly speaking, is that ordinarily statutory law regulates things like people and companies, and ordinary constitutional law is the outer limits of what governments are allowed to do. State governments or federal governments in the US, so most of the discussion about privacy and data retention and surveillance in the US is about what does the NSA, know about me? And what should they be allowed to know about me? And I feel like most of the discussion in the European Union is more about what do corporations know about me? And I don't mean to express a really sort of one-sided American viewpoint here, I think corporate data exploitation is getting worse and worse and especially worse in cases where corporations are in league with governments to basically surveil and rate citizens. And hopefully, you know exactly what I'm talking about when I said surveilling rate, the key sort of example here is what China is doing with [Alipay](https://intl.alipay.com/) and [WeChat](https://www.wechat.com/en/), basically accumulating massive amounts of data about all the financial transactions of Chinese citizens and imputing it —transparently and openly they admit that they're doing this— to a social credit score that the government will help maintain, and if your score goes too low because you said something unpatriotic or you bought something that you shouldn't buy, you just can't travel abroad anymore you can't even take high-speed rail, maybe your bank, all your transactional accounts gets closed, who knows what happens to you. So, we've got three approaches globally right now, we've got a US approach that's maybe too fixated on government surveillance and not enough on corporate surveillance, the European approach that I definitely think trusts its governments too much, and is maybe a little weary of corporations and you've got what, I hate to be so, you know, down on the Chinese because I love the people, but I'm wary of their government, that seems to be fairly indifferent about both corporate and state surveillance.

Gavigan: I think that's a fair description of the UK approach, certainly there have been a few cases where UK law enforcement and intelligence services have been found to have been conducting effectively bulk surveillance, bulk collection of data. It's been declared to be illegal, there have been no consequences, or the law has then been changed, to make it legal.

Valkenburgh: Yeah, it's funny because I was looking for precedent to write a UK comment and it's interesting the all the cases in the European Convention literature on privacy rights, under the European Convention, the defendants are the Nations that have been brought up in front of that court are either Russia or the UK. [laughing] Good company.

Gavigan: It's not not great, uncomfortable. I only live in the UK. I don't have anything else to say.

Baldet: Okay. Well, what we're also talking about the UK, they have much more stringent open banking data loss departments that people can then access their data and the US has been looking at that. There were some proposals perhaps traffic got into Dodd-Frank even and yet there's been no traction and I've had conversations with people involved there in the Dodd-Drank regulation and they've simply said, "We don't answer this, we're not", they would not even take the questions. So do you think that that is going to come to the US, are we learning from that, are we going to replicate errors of GDPR and/or is take back your data better? I mean, what are we learning? And what should we really be doing differently?
24:48
Valkenburgh: I mean you generally look at like, take out your data type language and it's pretty weak sauce, right. So you look at like Dodd-Frank 1033 and there's all sorts of exceptions to when the company should give data to the customer. One of the big ones being it's just not commonly available in the regular course of business, like, it's too much trouble, is basically what that legal language would probably mean and I'm not an expert in the European Open banking laws but to me, this is the wrong approach and the fundamentally right approach is not to expect governments to force corporations to make their data available to people. It is to replace corporations with open protocols that have their data available to the people. It's something that —thank you—, it's something that Ali Benson said at a speech in Stanford recently that he called, "Inclusive accountability". So why do you trust your bank? Because it's audited by one of the big four accounting firms and it's chartered by a government. There's a few people who make sure that the bank is accountable. Why do you trust, if you trust the Monero or the Zcash blockchain? Because there's thousands of people around the world who can download the open-source software run it on a commonly, you know, available Internet-connected device, and check all the math. And yeah, there's still a barrier in the inclusivity of that accountability, you need to be fairly sophisticated to do those checks yourself, but this is a set of thousands versus a set of one or two or three. So from my perspective and this is, this is my personal view we've never really taken this issue of open banking at Coin Center, I'm not optimistic about those laws because they'll always have sort of ways to weasel out and not share data that you should be sharing. I'm optimistic about technology that replaces the companies those laws would apply to. 

Gavigan: In Europe, the open banking stuff kind of, it grew out of a desire to spur competition amongst the banks. Then the UK spearheaded and took it further than probably the EU would have gone by itself and took a leadership role there. The purpose of it was to, it was basically to allow customers to choose with whom their banking data would be shared because it was locked up inside the banks and in the UK, unlike other countries the vast majority of the banking sector was controlled by six large groups, I think about five. And it was just locked up in there you couldn't get it out, except for screen scraping or scanning in your statements. So it was, the whole open banking work in the UK was about unlocking that data, making it available to third-party providers with the appropriate permission of the data subject and unleashing innovation for people to, you know, take data, combine it, have a single view across all their accounts. I think in the US the company [PLAID](https://plaid.com/), PLAID, did something similar but in the UK now, it's being done using APIs properly instead of using screens here.

Baldet: I would love to talk more about open banking but I'm going to throw it back to Denver to make sure we don't go too long. So please take it back. 

Sarang: Sure, so kind of a question throwing over to Erik. So you have built a, you know, pretty successful business kind of in this space as the regulatory landscape seems to have been evolving over time and so since businesses like yours, you know, coming under, you know, perhaps more intense regulation interact with customers and clients from around the world, who may be subject to different sorts of regulations, you know, how do you see some of these practical considerations being addressed by businesses? And, you know, where do you see this going? Are our regulated entities like yours going to end up taking kind of a most conservative approach when dealing with customers and clients more around the world or you kind of have to sort of tailor your interactions based on jurisdiction, where is this going?

Voorhees: Yeah, good question. One theme that I've seen in the crypto world is that you tend to have companies that get of a certain size and, you know, Coinbase being the best example of this, they feel that they have to be, you know, overly compliant and in some senses they do. They have to look exactly like a bank and probably be more diligent about a lot of these regulations than banks because they're under much more scrutiny than banks. And they feel so paranoid about that position that they do not feel that they can speak out against any of those regulations that they, themselves, are under. And then you have sort of the with the polar opposite which are the, you know, anonymous developers around the world who haven't built a company but feel comfortable being outspoken and writing amazing technology that preserves people's privacy by default. And there isn't a lot in the middle there. And so, I think what we at ShapeShift are trying to do is build a real big business that's highly profitable and gets well known around the world and do it while speaking out against a lot of these issues, and I think that platform is something that's going to be very important. I'm hoping that we won't be the only company that does that. Kraken has done a great job with this as well. And I'm hoping that as the crypto industry grows around the world we'll see lots of companies that to the extent that they feel that they need to comply with certain rules they also can feel comfortable at the same time speaking out against those rules in conveying why they're unethical.

Sarang: Interesting. I mean, you can you kind of briefly hinted at, you know, the role that developers and engineers and folks who kind of work on some of these asset projects, either play or don't play in this, do you see there being more room for relationships to be built between developers? And, you know, some of these entities that, you know, build businesses around those projects, like is there a role for these both to play to kind of fill that middle ground?

Voorhees: Yeah, I'm a fan of the Hydra approach, right? So lots of people taking lots of different strategies to grow crypto generally as an alternative to the fiat financial system and that's going to range from people doing all sorts of different strategies all around the world using different messaging, using different tactics, building different types of projects ranging from the very distributed to the very centralized, and I want to see more of that kind of diversity in the approach.

Sarang: And kind of putting on the spot here. So, you know, knowing where the regulatory landscape, you know, is right now and maybe appears to be going, is there anything that you would have done differently building up ShapeShift knowing that, you know, this, you know, wherever we are now, would be coming? 

Voorhees: Yeah, I mean there's a million mistakes we've made that I wish I could go change.

Sarang: And I'm not asking you to go and enumerate all the mistakes you feel like you've made but, you know, kind of more broadly speaking, you know, or for that matter. If you were to give advice to someone else trying to build up a business in this space, you know, would you have any advice to give that person knowing that this regulatory environment is where it is now?

Voorhees: Probably the advice would be for people that are trying to build a crypto business to realize that you're taking on not only the struggle of a start-up, which is very hard to do itself. But taking on the struggle of a regulatory battle, for many, maybe most crypto companies they have to take on that challenge of a regulatory battle. Which is immensely costly. Carries certain personal risks to them, and dealing with both of those challenges at the same time. And just recognizing that that is going to be the struggle you have to deal with I think ahead of time is very helpful to people. Probably that will scare a lot of people away from ever building and that's really sad, that's really tragic. One of the most harmful parts of all this regulation are the unseen businesses that never get built, the unseen features that never get released because people were too scared, too nervous, too frightened. They didn't want to go to jail and have their family ruined because they were worried some regulator was going to shut them down for trying to build something that protected people's privacy. That's a really tragic state of the world and so, it's really encouraging that it hasn't been shut down completely.

Brito: Can I say, I think like an unintended consequence back to unintended consequences of regulation being as unforgiving as it is, for lots of business models, is that I think that drives people to think about how do you build it in such a way where it's pure software, right? And you're not putting yourself at risk. And so I, you know, that's kind of like a good unintended consequence that I think will come from this.

Voorhees: Yeah, the life finds away from Jurassic Park, I think is very very prevalent in crypto, crypto finds a way.

Sarang: It went great for Jurassic Park, didn't it?

Voorhees: Went great for the dinosaurs.

Sarang: That's true, all right, depends which side you're on I guess. So now I guess we'll go ahead pass it back off to Zcon in Croatia for more questions.

Baldet: Sure, so kind of just to tag off of what Erik was saying, Jack, you handle regulatory engagement for Zcash and I would assume that a lot of people outside of this area might think that that's an extremely difficult conversation but you've been very proactive and had a remarkable amount of success in that area. So, can you talk a little bit about how you approach it? And what it is that has made them not, I guess, slam the door in your face?

Gavigan: So, I think number one in on a suit. That strangely helps a lot if you show up and you look like you belong in there in their meeting room. Then that helps a lot. I've seen Zooko in a suit now several times. It's a scary side. 

Valkenburgh: It's probably better than the zebra suit he's been wearing here.

Baldet: He's wearing a zebra [inaudible] right now.

Gavigan: I think step one is when you kick off the engagements or when you first meet them. What I've done is, I've acknowledged the validity of the goals that they are pursuing. So I say, "Look, we don't want to see Zcash being used by criminals, we don't want to see Zcash being used to fund terrorism. Let's get that out of the way, you know straight away". And then, it means that you can then progress from a shared platform, and then it's about educating them about what Zcash is and what it's not, and what I found is that there's normally this misunderstanding that privacy somehow equates to anonymity, and that an exchange that lists Zcash is unable to KYC its customers. And of course, that's absolutely ridiculous but these people are not technologists, they don't understand these protocols, they don't understand cryptocurrency. So a large part of what I do is education. Walking them through just how Zcash can be compatible and is compatible with all of the regulations that apply to prevent money laundering and terrorist financing. I was at the FATF meeting where, back in May, where with these new recommendations were being discussed and, you know, when I commented about the paragraph 7b the travel rule equivalent that applies to pressure loss service providers, you know, I was able to start off by saying, you know, "Before I go any further. I want to make it clear that I've got no dog in this fight because Zcash is compliant with this rule, you can send the beneficiary and the originator information along with the shield Zcash transaction."

Baldet: You can.

Gavigan: You can.

Baldet: But you do not have to.

Gavigan: You don't have to, no, no.

Baldet: It's an important distinction.

Gavigan: So the big challenge that exchanges are facing now, is it looks like they're going to have to build an entirely new messaging system. Basically, a shadow version or a crypto version of Swift, in order to pass this information back and forth amongst them. It's a lot easier if you can just attach it to the transaction itself. So, you know, acknowledging the validity of the goals that they're pursuing, educating them, and then saying to them look, you know, how can we work together to make it easy for people to be compliant, whilst at the same time maintaining their privacy? You know, and I'm really, when you engage in a constructive discussion like that, it becomes far more positive far more constructive. And it's, you know, we've had success, you know, both in the States and we've got a good relationship in the UK we were hoping to start to expand that where we're looking at Japan where I think there's a fair, that there's a misunderstanding about what privacy coins, as they're often called, are used for and what the purpose of them is? So, it's really about getting on the same page education and not adopting an adversarial position.

Baldet: And, so I mean, we've all spent time speaking with regulators, and I think if you don't do that much they do seem like this kind of singular organism but really there are lots of individuals there. It's kind of like, lawyers, like, you need to find a lawyer that's going to have a position that starts from a place that you can work with. Some will always start from, no, some will start from well, let me see. All right, so how much do you think that some of the individuals, that you've engaged with that these agencies that their beliefs have actually impacted things —I'm thinking specifically about some of the names they've shown up in the headlines, like former CFTC commissioners that, you know, decided to take this on personally—, but do you think that those kinds of advocates had really changed the entire kind of game or is at the end of the day is the organization larger than that individual?

Valkenburgh: I mean, so.

Baldet: Both of you.

Valkenburgh: Yeah, you're absolutely right agencies are made up of people and people have each of them idiosyncratic and unique ideas, and beliefs, and we run into a ton who they love that Coin Center reached out to them to give a briefing because they're excited about the technology, not because if they necessarily see it as a threat to their job, to the policy that they're trying to achieve, because they just think it's another exciting development in the world of technology. And then we find people who are deeply skeptical who you arrive and the immediate thought is this is a tool for nothing but money laundry and terrorist finance, and so, you're right, making those personal connections and starting where they're starting is important but I suppose it's always going to be like that. What could fundamentally change things and which is primarily the reason for why we think Coin Center should be around is that one day it could be much more monolithic, it could be less, this is a slow-burning policy concern of a lot of people and different people have different opinions and it could change too suddenly this is something monumental that must be addressed and it becomes much more public and people are all thinking and mass about it and that could be triggered by various things. It could be triggered by a terrorist attack being quite clearly funded using virtual currencies, which we've never really seen, we've seen tiny amounts used to support or attempted, you know, support of terrorist organizations through relatively trivial amounts, but that could change and if that changes it would be a much bigger conversation at which point you'd have to not start at the sort of human personal level but start at the sort of first principles. Which is why we've started writing a lot about constitutional law which is why we've started writing a lot about, "Look these tools, will be used as all tools are for both good and evil. It's important if you're trying to achieve a policy result not to stifle all the good just because you're so concerned about the evil". Another thing that could trigger a more monolithic policy conversation, it might already be happening, is a major company deciding to release cryptocurrency. So Facebook's Libra announcement has certainly completely changed that tambor of conversations in Washington DC, at least, if I believe the headlines because I haven't even been there since the announcement, I've been here in Croatia, but I think that's definitely, it could either be good or bad for the open projects like Zcash or Monero. It could on one hand give people who are skeptical of this thing a more obvious target because they are you don't like Facebook for privacy violations and then we can say, "Well, yeah and actually our stuff is truly private rather than just having to trust Facebook", or it could be very bad for everyone if some over-reaction triggered by the current dissatisfaction, it seems from Congress with Facebook that triggers sort of monolithic cryptocurrency legislation or something like that. That is overbearing and extreme. I'm sure Jerry probably has things to say about that. So I'm reaching for his mic. 

[laughs]

Brito: What I'll say is, I was saying this yesterday here. I've never seen such a swift and clear reaction from the hill to an announcement as I saw with the Libra announcement. Within 48 hours, less than 48 hours of the announcement, Senate Banking and House Financial Services had announced a hearing. We're basically calling them into the principal's office, right? What I'll say is, you know, I think Peters right you could get different kinds of reactions triggered by that announcement but I think it's going to be more like the first reaction, which is because Libra is centralized, it has a reserve that is run by an organization and there's a very clear target and that target is one that comes from a very today unpopular on the hill organization, I think that's going to draw all the attention. And I think a lot of the questions related to Libra are not so much about money laundering and the like it's going to be about the reserve, right? So it's a stable coin, it's very different from everything else, like Zcash and Monero, and Bitcoin. And so I think that's what's going to attract privacy concerns because Facebook has not had a good track record on privacy is going to be the first thing but once the banking committee starts thinking about it a little bit, they're going to look and see this reserve, and start asking themselves all kinds of question about, "Well, how is this regulated?" And that's what I think is going to draw a lot of focus. And that can be good or bad. I think for open permissionless crypto I think what our job at Coin Center is going to have to be, over the next few months, is to just be on a lookout to make sure that folks in Congress do not get confused about Libra and Monero and Zcash and Bitcoin. We have to go in there and explain the difference between permission and permissionless between something that has a reserve and something that is a bearer asset and just keep hammering at that distinction. That's going to be our number one job and the other thing I would say quickly is, you know, we thought we had, so we've, since Coin Center started we've been on the lookout for that black swan event that triggers a reaction, where people stop thinking rationally individually and it becomes this monolithic group think, in reaction to some event, and we thought we had one, which I guess I can talk about now, which is the, there was an indictment against Russian spy, the special counsel's office by Robert Muller, and it dropped on a Friday, and that indictment, explained how Russians interfered with the US Elections. And part of what technology that they used was Bitcoin. And that dropped on a Friday, on Tuesday there was going to be a hearing, about cryptocurrency. It was going to be focused on sort of securities law, right? So hangover from the ICO stuff. And we're like, okay this is it, right? The Democrats on Capitol Hill were very focused on obviously the Russia investigation. There was going to be hearing, this is, you know, Bitcoin was used by Russians to interfere in US Elections and we were ready for it, we prepared, we were ready for that, nothing happened. But all of the news stories that, all the news stories that came out, and when we talked to folks on Capitol Hill, they basically, I don't want to say parrotted, they basically talked about it the way we've been talking about the use of this technology for a long time, which is this is a tool, you know, what else the Russian hackers used, they used email and they used PayPal and used planes because they came over here, right? And we didn't have any, you know, negative reaction to those technologies. And so that's how it, you know, it was portrayed, just as a technology that was misused. Which is good.

Baldet: That happened to be the congressional hearing that Tuesday that I just [inaudible]—

Brito: Oh yeah, that's right.

Baldet: —and it did come up during the discussion, but we kind of got them by the end, I think, the guy who kind of led the whole discussion had simply said listen, "As long as the criminals keep using Bitcoin sounds like we can trace it and that's great". So they were happy about that. I did get a follow-up question and then a written follow-up where they were saying, but with something like these privacy coins, how are we supposed to do the same thing? So they are aware that there's a differentiation and we can say, that you can create a system where there is this kind of disclosure like Jack is talking about but that's a very different thing. And they do understand the difference between we can't force everyone to disclose and we will never be able to fully satisfy that law enforcement question.

Gavigan: Yeah, you asked before about the different individuals and the different agencies and, different agencies and regulators have different focuses, okay focuses, you know, the SEC cares about security law, FINCEN, department of treasury care about sanctions violations and money laundering, and the law enforcement care about catching the bad guys. The law enforcement are not there to protect our right to privacy. They're there to catch bad guys. So when you talk to different regulators or policymakers, the conversation changes, and in some cases, a good conversation to have is to talk about the consequences of wholesale breaches of privacy and the [inaudible] in the context of interference in democratic elections which is enabled by, you know, foreigners, foreign state actors being able to surveil people through platforms that are not private. And that does actually can, sometimes when you say that you can see the cogs start to turn to realize actually, this is a national security issue and coincidentally when congresswoman Maxine Waters published her statement about, you know, calling on Facebook to stop development of Libra until congress gets to grips with it. She put privacy and national security right next to one another in the census. So, you know, sometimes it feels like these people aren't listening, but I think that actually sometimes the message feels like it is actually seeping through.

Baldet: And I can say right before I flew out here, I was at FORTUNE's Brainstorm Finance conference, which is, pretty fun great group of people, but it's very kind of banking executives, there were definitely former high-level regulators and things in the room. And we did a lunch about blockchain and of course, descends to regulation very very quickly and exactly that point that this former regulator literally said, you know, "I understand the human rights argument here but my job as a regulator is to exert our jurisdiction figure out what falls into this and to make rules and make sure everyone kind of stays within that ruleset and find people that need enforcement actions filed against them, might, and we cannot, we do not, and we cannot really coordinate globally, even though we all individually understand that problem set. Which is definitely challenging", and that, my closing statement there was, "Gosh, this has been really fun talking about regulation for so long but now I'm really excited to fly to Zcon where I can talk with developers and not have to talk about regulation". So here we are. Okay, so I'm going to throwback over, maybe we can talk a little bit more about some of the engineering side again.

Sarang: Yeah, so, you know we've talked about kind of the advocacy perspective the business perspective and things like that and a lot of these, a lot of these regulatory environment can kind of seem like a minefield where, you know, there's all sorts of new mines being placed all the time and it's kind of tough to see where to go. So where, you know, if anywhere, do you see the role of people like protocol developers and engineers who are building these things, what role —if any— do you think that they should be playing? In some of these interactions between the users of the assets and, you know, perhaps miners and exchanges and regulators and governments. And, you know, what role if any should they be playing? It's a very very broad question but maybe you kind of go and kind of a round-robin and see what everyone on the panel thinks about this.

Brito: Yes, so a few things. I mean, I think number one they should be continued to build it what they're building, right, because that's really what matters and that's what's going to allow people to do what they want to do in the world and not have to worry so much about regulation. So continue to build what you're building but as you do that one thing you might want to do is try to stay abreast of what are the regulatory pain points, that people who are trying to do different activities at a layer above the protocol might be experiencing and ask yourself, is there a way that you can basically have code eat that, right? And abstract that away so that it's not subject to regulation. And you have to remember, you know, the reason we have regulation is because there is some risk to the public that we have regulation to address and typically that's going to be associated with custody, right, because of you have a firm that's providing a service, and in order to do that, they're taking custody of your funds, let's say it's exchanged, let's say it's a tip bot service, let's say it's a wallet, whatever it may be, let's say it's escrow. They're taking custody of consumer funds they're creating a risk to consumers and that's where the government says, "Hey, here are the standards that you've got to follow."

Voorhees: I'm going to take a little issue with that real quick.

Brito: Yeah, okay.

Voorhees: I think that is often conveyed by them as this is important because customers have money at risk but if you actually look at the laws and the attention that regulators have put down on companies, their guidance isn't about best standards for keeping funds safe.

Brito: 100 percent agree.

Voorhees: Right? It's like, best standards for how to surveil your people and they report it back to the government.

Brito: But here's my point, the risk is the hook for them to say, "This is why we have regulation", and so my point is to developers, protocol developers other engineers working on this, figure out. If you can keep abreast of what the regulatory pain points are, figure out, what risks can you eliminate by getting rid of custody? And then, there is no hook for regulation. That's my point.

Sarang: I mean, anything comment wise to add Erik—

Voorhees: Yeah.

Sarang: —since you know a lot about custody and you know a lot about custody in what you do?

Voorhees: I mean one thing I'm a little, you know, I guess cynical on, is, you know, the early version of ShapeShift we didn't have user accounts and we didn't do KYC. And it wasn't, I mean, the goal wasn't really so that everyone could be anonymous. The goal was because that actually helped protect people. So we had two kinds of pillars, one was that we didn't take custody and one was that we didn't have an [inaudible] of a whole bunch of personal information that people didn't want to give us in the first place. I felt very proud of building that because it protected people in a world where data breaches happen all the time. Ranging from small companies up to targets of the world and the IRS and, you know, the Federal Government itself. To be able to interact online with people without taking their personal information seemed like a huge benefit for the world, like a great achievement, and yet that is completely cast aside because regulators actually don't care about protecting consumers. They don't actually care about that generally, they use that as a pretext to control and surveil people and I found that to be deeply troubling, and I think in a world where consumer protection was actually lauded much of what crypto technology has built —which allows people to transact freely and openly and without lots of fraud—, that happens in the traditional world, that would be something heralded by these regulators and it has not been.

Sarang: So is there a role that, you know, that developers and folks building these protocols can play?

Voorhees: Yeah, I mean you keep doing what you're doing I, you know. One of the amazing bright spots in the crypto advancement is that it is still legal for an engineer to build software that lets people transact privately with each other, right, like when Monero and Zcash are great examples of this. That's legal and no one currently is contesting that that's legal and lots of engineers around the world are building those things and people feel relatively safe doing so. That's amazing. And so as long as that continues, you know, that's the ultimate bulwark I think against any of the surveillance stuff because even if certain companies get compromised by that, the industry can always retreat back into the lower level protocol work. So whatever one needs to be very diligent against is any kind of advancement by regulators to try to regulate the actual writing of code. Thank goodness that that gets into Constitutional issues and free speech issues and that there's no precedent for that. I hope it stays that way.

Sarang: Yeah, I'd love to hear the thoughts on the panels from the Zcon side on the same question.

Valkenburgh: Yeah, I completely agree. That's why we felt the need about almost a year ago now to really pivot to at Coin Center talking about electronic cash and why it's a fundamental advance that will improve human flourishing and human dignity to make the moral case as Jerry did in a paper that he published and then to make a constitutional argument in the US about Fourth Amendment and First Amendment rights, and why any attempt to do something horrendously over-broad and regulate open-source software developers would be unconstitutional so we can fight them on their own terms if there was ever this appetite. And, you know, what's been a really satisfying thing for me to watch is that we haven't had to fight this since we released these papers, quite the opposite, at least for now, FinCEN, the FATF, and probably the UK too, even though they raised this question in a consultation. I think they were just looking for input, really. None of these states have really gone down that road. In fact, they've, FATF and the US have made clear statements that even a developer of software for a decentralized exchange like [0x](https://0x.org/), for example, and even somebody who maybe even helps run that software and make it available to the world like a radar relay or something like that, as long as they don't take custody, they don't fit into our rule sets and there's clear statements in both the FATF Interpretive note that came out two days ago that those entities would not fall under financial surveillance obligations and there's clear statements in FINCEN's guidance from last May. And then just on the broader question that this round of the panel was supposed to discuss of, you know, what can developers do? I wanted to for once, I'm it's probably not the first time, caution developers or tell developers to be much more careful than some of them have been. Never pretend that what you've built or maybe what you're doing is fundamentally different because it's technology when it's not fundamentally different. And the biggest existential threat we've had, at least from Coin Center's perspective to this technology, was the ICO boom. It was absurd, it was gross, and abhorrent that people raised incredible amounts of money on promises of future cryptocurrencies that they hadn't developed yet, these are developers, it's not them in their capacity as developers, it's, in this case, them and their capacity as people who are raising money. And that could be fine but I think it was fairly clear that in a lot of situations you might be running afoul of US securities laws. And so there should have probably been more due diligence and more effort to make sure that you didn't run afoul of those laws, you know, not defending those laws, they're just the laws. And then what really bothered me about the ICO boom and some of the responses to the ICO boom was this attempt by some to claim that because you were selling a token or a promise of a token, it was somehow suddenly not a securities issuance. Even though there was an investment of money and a reliance upon your efforts for profits that you would effectively promise. Putting a token label on it, making it a blockchain project does not mean that if you raise a bunch of money from investors and make promises of capital appreciation, that you have an issue to security. And arguing that well, because it's new technology it should get a pass, is the wrong argument. You might think that the accredited investor rule that limits people's ability to buy your token to rich people in Sand Hill Road in San Francisco in Palo Alto, is abhorrent, and that might be a good argument, but then your enemy is Securities Laws writ large and investor protection laws as they're specified in the US writ large. You've got a lobby to change the way we do capital formation. You don't lobby because it's cool tech, "I shouldn't have to comply with Securities Laws". So that's my flip it and say something critical of maybe some developers. Funny people didn't do ICOs, of course.

Baldet: Likely not everyone. If you're in this room just go ahead and if you had a question that you wrote down, I think Anthony and Josh have picked up most of them, but make sure that they get them. We're going to start Q&A here in a second. 

Brito: I Think Eric wanted to, yeah.

Voorhees: Oh, I'll take up the mantle of defending the ICO boom to some degree. Surely a whole bunch of crappy projects got way more money than they ever should have and people should have been much more diligent about which projects they funded, all true. And there's certainly plenty of fraud and scams, all true. There are also a few shining lights there and of course the best example of this is Ethereum itself, which ran the biggest token sale that had ever happened ever, up to that point, on essentially a promise of something that hadn't been built yet, on huge hype. And they delivered, and they actually built one of the most important cryptos the world has ever seen. They've changed the world. And I'm glad that they did that. I'm glad that they didn't spend five years trying to navigate Securities Laws instead of releasing that and actually just going forward. So yes, you know, maybe 9 out of 10 examples are bad but those rare ones that actually raised money and build something great, I think those deserve to be noted as well.

Baldet: Yep and I'd like to sneak in one question off the back of this discussion as well before we move into the audience questions, but this is really, you know, we have this idea that every technology can be used for quote-unquote good or bad as though that kind of delineation is such a bright line but certainly a lot of technologies I would wager all of them can be used for many different purposes and we often hear the argument that technology itself is neutral or that developers should be neutral, do you think that that's actually a good argument to make or should we actually be asking creators of this technology —whether you're a developer or at some other point in the supply chain— should we be telling people that in truth you really cannot be neutral if you're working on a project like one of these, you simply will never be viewed as neutral and you have an obligation to almost advocate through what you create or no? What's the right [inaudible]? 

Valkenburgh: I mean, not if what you're doing is publishing code. It can't be a legal obligation to publish a code of a certain type because—

Baldet: I'm not talking a legal obligation here, it's something more about.

Valkenburgh: —more ethical?

Baldet: Yeah.

Valkenburgh: Probably, I guess, that's not my field [laughter].

[laughs]

Gavigan: I think it's fair—

Baldet: I finally found something Peter won't talk about.

Gavigan: I think it's fair—

Valkenburgh: My fear is if you get into a position where a centralized entity like a government is telling people what is good and bad, and with regard to writing code, that's game over, because even something that seems to have absolutely no legitimate purpose like, a computer virus—

Baldet: That has a purpose.

Valkenburgh: —or a spoofing algorithm —legitimate purpose. Even something that seems to have no legitimate purpose, we need to have free speech protections, for those hideous things because people need to be able to talk about them to stop them. A proprietary trading firm that has an algorithm that will spoof markets might be doing it because they need to train their AI to identify other people spoofing transactions on markets. The fact that they developed their version to train their AI should not subject them to any legal obligations, they might have a moral-ethical obligation to keep that thing, maybe confidential, not share it with their friend, who they know is a known criminal, all kinds of things like that but when you get down to the question of whether people can or cannot write something, on paper or in a terminal window, it can't be a distinction I think made by governments because that's the road to totalitarianism and the end of free speech.

Gavigan: I think—

Baldet: Do you think that just to phrase it, do you think that developers should, are naive if they do not consider adversarial uses of what they create?

Gavigan: I don't think they're necessarily naive, I think they should, they should think about the, you know, the uses to which that technology will be put. But there's a difference between speech and action, you know, and coded speech. And then the action is what you use it for. The analogy that I sometimes draw when describing that, you know, technology's neutral position is that, you can use a kitchen knife to stab someone or you can use it to chop vegetables. The fact that you can use it to stab someone doesn't mean that we should ban knives, you know, that would make life very difficult in the kitchen. So [laughter] and, you know, it's, some technologies may end up being skewed or maybe end up so heavily used for criminal purposes that their creators should maybe, you know, should maybe to, think again about their actions. I remember chit-chatting about this with Brian from OB1, the creators of [OpenBazaar](https://openbazaar.org/), we were in London and a journalist was asking us about how we felt about the fact that Zcash and OpenBazaar were potentially being used by criminals? I mean we gave him that answer and they said, you know, he pushed further and he said, "What if it turned out that the vast majority of usage was by criminals?" And I think we both went well, you know, if it were proven to be the case, then, you know, we might have to, yeah, we agreed that we would probably have to reconsider, whether we wanted to continue working and developing and improving that project if it turned out that it was overwhelmingly being used by criminals. Now, I think that the people who work on Monero and on Zcash do so because they believe in the right to privacy and I think that that in and of itself is taking a moral and ethical position and enacting that position through their authorship of the code.

Baldet: And I'd love to hear this from the other side as well.

Sarang: Yeah, I mean, Jerry do you want to take it up from here?

Brito: No, I mean just to echo what's been said I really don't have another different answer, yeah.

Voorhees: I think every person expresses their moral and ethical qualities through their actions each day. So the things that you spend your time doing are the expression of your moral actions. Much more than what you think of morals and ethics in your head, what you actually spend your time doing is your morals is your ethics and so I think there's not really any way to be neutral. I mean certain projects are not going to have moral and ethical effects as much as others will but certainly whatever you're doing is that expression. And I think that's hugely powerful, I mean, that's why crypto has taken off because millions of people around the world find this stuff to be profoundly important for humanity and they've put their time and energy into it. And so I love seeing that and I think that should continue.

Brito: And I would say this too that, you know, people, developers who are developing a software, you know, they're doing it because they believe what they're doing is good. I think there is going to be a very small minority of people who are developing these things because they actively think is this going to be bad for the world and are going to be doing harm. And I think even when you try to judge somebody, you know, and say, you know, is what they're doing, have a net positive in the world? If you use the standards like that journalist Jack who asked to, you know, what if Zcash was being used mostly for illegal transactions? You know, even then if we're talking about morality and ethics and that law maybe those things that are illegal shouldn't be and are indeed, you know, are still more unethical uses. So even if you're facilitating something that is illegal in China, like, you know, assembly among people who the state doesn't want to assemble, well, I think that's still something you should be doing.

Sarang: All right, great, thanks, so let's go ahead and jump into for the last 20 minutes of our time here, some questions from the audience. Both on Monero's side and over on the Zcon side. And so the first question that we have which I'm paraphrasing just a little bit here, from the audience, asks, How might different current or future classifications of different crypto assets, as some kind of commodity, security, you know, maybe someday even currency, whatever that's supposed to mean, affect the regulatory landscape? And, you know, is that distinction important and if so, should there be advocacy around particular kinds of classifications?

Brito: So if you limit yourself to true cryptocurrency, right, things where you have a running network with a token that is native to the network, right? So we're talking here about Bitcoins, Zcash, Ethereum, and the like, then that thing, and I'm talking here about the US, that thing is going to be considered a commodity. And so that classification really, you know, has very little bearing on what users do, it has, the only bearing it really has is for markets, in the thing. If they're going to be offering futures, it's maybe regulated by the [CFTC](https://www.cftc.gov/). Also the CFTC, it does not supervise cash markets, spot markets, for these things but it does have a sort of anti-fraud authority, right. So sort of after the fact policing for manipulation and the like, that could change, and I can imagine Congress looking to create some authority at the CFTC or elsewhere that would create some kind of market supervision for those markets. Beyond that, the only other classification that really matters is for tax purposes and so today cryptocurrency is not classified as a currency because currency is defined in law as the coin of a nation-state, and these things are not. Which is really funny though because if some state were to adopt a cryptocurrency as its national currency, then that would change US law which is really interesting but so it's a weird thing that probably never happened or maybe will. I have little hope that the law would be changed to reclassify crypto as currency and that has positives and negatives. The positive is that you're an investor and you're buying and holding for the long term, if you ever sell and you experience capital gains, you're going to be taxed out of capital gains rate, which is more advantageous than the alternative which would just be your marginal tax rate, so that's good. The downside is that if you're using cryptocurrency as currency, right, if you're using it to buy goods and services. You are disposing of the crypto and creating a tax event every time you buy something, so if I buy Monero today and tomorrow or next week the price has gone up and it buy a cup of coffee technically I've experienced capital gain there. My obligation as a taxpayer is to note that report that and pay taxes on that even if it's pennies. And so that creates so much friction that it makes the thing very difficult to really gain wide acceptance and if you think about it, it kind of is a showstopper for just the networks themselves because if you think about it Ethereum, every time you run a smart contract you have to pay gas, that paying gas, is a taxable event, potentially. We don't have hope that we're gonna be able to change the law there to try to reclassify. So what we've done is that we have worked on a bill that would create that minimum exemption from tax, for small transactions. It was $600 in the last Congress. This Congress will be reintroduced probably lower as a compromise to be around 250 and so, any transactions below that amount, if this bill passes, you don't have to worry about. So that's the way we're trying to address that.

Sarang: Anything to add Erik?

Voorhees: I think crypto is doing a great job at destroying categories that used to make sense. This is very visible in the securities realm. The [SEC](https://www.sec.gov/) is unable to tell you exactly which tokens are securities. They pretend, they fame that it's obvious, but it is not. They can't even do that with just the topic of securities. The fact that Bitcoin came out before crypto kitties meant that the New York bit license classified crypto kitties as a virtual currency and it is illegal now in New York to sell crypto kitties without a bit license. Totally absurd because the stuff tried to get classified by politicians that didn't understand what it was. And so, I think it would behoove any regulator to wait longer before trying to classify a lot of this stuff and that makes them uncomfortable. But even those of us in the industry can't give you lots of good definitions for these things because part of what makes them cool is that they break down these definitions.

Valkenburgh: Yeah, I think just briefly on the broad topic of whether you want classification or not, you don't, and that's not necessarily something that's totally new to cryptocurrency. The best laws that we have are laws that are activities based that regulate people doing something with things in the world because laws should regulate people they shouldn't regulate things. And so, the anti-money laundering context despite us sort of, you know, treating that as the main topic and a big threat or something like that. Things have been pretty good because in the US and abroad the anti-money laundering statutes are based on activities. Did you transmit money for someone else? And there's been I think reasonable progress in developing a definition of what that activity means in the context of virtual currency. It means at least transiently having some of the virtual currency on behalf of your customer and helping them give it to somebody else. And that creates a surprisingly bright-line standard that makes for pretty easy compliance for people to figure out whether they are in or out of an anti-money laundering regime. And I think the outcome has been great that we now know for sure that open-source software developers and non-custodial wallet providers and even people who write DEX software or might run DEX servers for central order books, are generally speaking, not holding from one person and giving to another, and therefore not regulated. Securities Laws are a bit of a mess because we constantly think about this classification. It's a security or it's not. Although the actual test for whether something says security is an activities-based test. It's, did you, have an investment of money with an expectation of profits rely on the efforts of a third party or promoter? And yeah, maybe the SEC has been a little slow for some people's tastes, with defining what that activity means in the context of a metaphor with cryptocurrency, but I actually think they're doing a pretty good job for, you know, any government agency that's faced with this massive explosion of investment interest in this exotic new instrument and having to learn a lot about, you know, the differences between say, proof of work and proof of stake and a premine versus a no premine a pre-sale with the premine and a pre-sale. It's not an easy task, yeah.

Baldet: Okay, let's do one from the audience here, I'm merely a pass-through entity on this question. Okay, so, what must happen to Libra in order to take down Facebook or alternatively? What must have happened to Facebook to take down Libra?

Valkenburgh: I guess aren't they the same? Oh right, Libra Association is different.

Baldet: But the Libra Association Foundation is separate but I believe we're just speaking in general about, I mean, Facebook right now is still a larger entity. Anyone can go ahead.

Voorhees: Is this on again? Yeah, probably the right answer there is that we can't answer that until we see how Libra is actually deployed, and also it will be different on day one than it is 10 years later. So allegedly, from what they say, it's going to start a little bit decentralized. Out of their hands to a little degree and over time it may become out of their hands to some degree. We don't know what degree that will be yet and so we don't know how closely tied Facebook will actually be to Libra or not.

Gavigan: Yes, I think there's a lot of unknowns. There's a lot of armchair experts on Twitter giving very very detailed analysis, based on a whole bunch of assumptions some of which are correct, some of which are just unfounded. And I mean, it's definitely a bit of a, it's creating a focal point for all of this stuff and, you know, for privacy in general. Which I think is good. I actually think it's good that this conversation is happening as sooner rather than later. And, I [inaudible] direct answer to that particular question.

Valkenburgh: Sort of lightning answer as to what their biggest problems are probably going to be. I'd say if you have an association of member companies from different countries with different standards of say sanctions, unsanctioned nations where you can't make payments, are you gonna comply with the lowest common denominator? And that would usually be the US. Which has the most strict sanctions regime and just not, you know, allow any transactions to a Libra address and Iran. Or are you going to try and not comply or some of the members of the association can I comply and not comply and in a BFT consensus? I don't know what that would look like. Maybe some transactions make it through but then are the US entities in that association party to that decision by their Co association members and therefore violating OFAC? That's really a nightmare. So I would guess they'll just fully comply with OFAC and credit to Laura Shin for actually bringing that up on her podcast where she interviewed someone from Libra. And then the other thing is just as Jerry said earlier, well, I'll actually let Jerry say it if he wants to talk about the reserve.

Brito: Yeah, so I just think that just to play along with the question about, you know, how can Facebook takedown Libra? I, you know, I think that might happen simply because Facebook is the target of a lot of enmity today, you know, there's always one tech company typically in the world that it, you know, or in the US, that is this sort of target of hatred by both parties today and so that might rub off on Libra. And the easiest way that they could sort of, that the government could if it wanted to, sort of just call it a day on Libra, is to say, "We'll wait a minute you have this reserve. What is this reserve? Are you a bank? Or is this what? You have a basket of currencies and securities, your securitizing these and you're selling these to the public? That's an ETF or some kind of security, so yeah, you're a security." And I think if you look at the definition of security in the [Securities Act](https://sec.report/Form/Securities-Act-of-1933.pdf), there are a couple of things in there that you could, kind of, with a straight face say that the reserve is that in which case Libra is a security and then that's, it's game over. It doesn't work because securities can only be traded on regulated securities exchanges which an open network is not. So that's how, if Facebook draws enough ire to have the government decide that it wanted to really do something. That's how I think they might go about it.

Sarang: All right, and so probably time for maybe one kind of last big lightning round question with the time that we have left. And this question came from actually a couple different people on both sides of our talk and it's kind of general about what kind of the overall message for what we're all doing here is. So I think everyone here and over in Croatia, you know, definitely agrees that privacy and by extension financial privacy is, you know, critically important to the operation of a society and you know also kind of a fundamental human right. And, you know, we hear all the time in the news and from other people that we might talk to that the idea of a private transaction, you know, is somehow associated with criminality or with, you know, bad faith actions, the classic arguments, right? What's the response that we should be giving to that? To help convince others whether or not the people we know or our Legislatures anyone else that what we're doing is important and that what we believe in here is important?

Voorhees: Great question. The thing I worry most about is that at least in the US most people don't seem to really care about privacy, nor do they believe the moral arguments for it, they will not fight to defend it, and many of them are highly skeptical of anyone who does. I think that's really dangerous. Ultimately, if the majority of the public is opposed to privacy, that will trickle into policy and that will end up becoming indirect competition or direct clashing with anyone who's trying to advocate for it. The analogy I like to use is that everyone in their home has shades on their windows and they expect a certain degree of privacy in their homes, and no one questions that. They expect a certain degree of privacy in their communications with each other, two people who talk among each other no one would say that the government should automatically listen to that all the time and make sure that no one's talking about, you know, their terrorist activities. When you send an email to someone else, even though it's not really that private, you know, people generally, people are okay with encrypted information going between each other and messages and like they understand why that's that's useful but for some reason when it comes to money all that goes out the window and people believe that everyone's transaction should be surveilled all the time. And that's a big hypocrisy, a big contradiction in people's views and I'm hoping that will be resolved with them applying the value of privacy in transactions and in speech, rather than in rejecting privacy for both.

Brito: I mean, so answering that question is kind of the subject of the paper that I published in January and I think part of the thing to do when talking to folks, is to not just talk about privacy in isolation but to talk about cash. Which is what we're working on. And cash is private, but it's also censorship-resistant and permissionless, and basically, it is a tool that allows you to have autonomy and dignity in the world. It's an escape valve from a world in which if you have no cash you have no way of acting in the world without being watched and without having the possibility that you can be stopped from doing what you want to do. I think when you explain to people in those terms, you know, they begin to sort of think about their implications because everybody uses cash and they can understand that they might not always want to be watched. And I think if you, what you can do is sort of draw a distinction between the kind of open society where you have autonomy and dignity with a society that is not open and where everything is surveilled. And so China just happens to be a good foil for that. And I think drawing the contrast there I think helps people kind of understand, why we, and sadly there's their examples that you can use from here in the US that shows that we're not immune from going down that path if we're not careful.

Baldet: And from this side, I'll add to what Jerry was saying, a little bit extra tweak for you guys, that as we talk about going cashless it's this positive kind of conversation in the US. We don't always talk about China. We talk about Sweden and Scandinavian countries. We talk about the convenience of something, and when we also have these ongoing conversations about the reason we don't have mass adoption of cryptocurrency is the usability. We need to keep working on it until people don't know there's a blockchain in there somewhere. So if we're trying to just make it indistinguishable from Apple Pay then how do we continue having that conversation to differentiate that cashless and digital access to public, cryptocurrency as digital cash, are not the same thing?

Valkenburgh: Yeah, you're totally right. I was talking with a guy who runs a really beautiful olive plantation on Brač, here in Croatia —my wife and I did a little holiday beforehand, I'm not ashamed to say—, and he saw a shirt that I had that had Bitcoin on it, on my Zcash shirt, and he said, "Oh, you like Bitcoin?", I was like, "Yeah, I think it's a good technology for enhancing freedom and for, you know, making us be able to pay each other directly again" and he said, "Really?" because we had just paid and he doesn't take credit cards, and lots of places in Croatia do not take credit cards, and you get the sense that it's not just because banks won't extend credit, it's because there's a pretty deep-seated distrust of credit cards as a technology because, why would you bring this third party into your life? Why would you bring this bank into your life when two people can face each other and pay each other? And he had the notion that Bitcoin was probably like that. Why would you bring this Bitcoin technology and whoever's behind it into your life? So, what was difficult to convey, and I don't think I did a great job, I think I did my best, is that, well, actually it's software on your phone and you have software on your desktop at the museum, the olive oil factory museum, and it's going straight from the phone to the desktop. And, you know, we had a great conversation but the prejudice that a lot of people come to with this technology, and rightly so, because all technology's financial, except cash, have progressively eroded their privacy. Is that a new technology, it's just going to be a new middleman, a new master, and a new person to comply with the totalitarian government and, you know, pull their liberty away.

Gavigan: And then the case of Bitcoin you could argue that's true because it provides the totalitarians governments with that ledger of every single transaction

Valkenburgh: At least it's censorship-resistant, and so we shouldn't rag on Bitcoin too much. Is, at least, there's no government that necessarily could at least, without the tremendous expenditure of resources, step in and stop people from using the network but they could certainly learn a lot about the people who do that, which is, yay, Monero and Zcash, and Mimblewimble and Grin and everything else. And then the other brief thing I wanted to say was just, that story there from cash to credit cards to Big Data to cryptocurrency, we should be branding this not as a radical new idea, this is a tradition driven idea. What is radical, what should be deeply questioned by everybody is the idea that you can only pay through a system that collects information and that all that information will be aggregated by powerful parties. That is a radical plan for the future that we should criticize with all the energy we have and the plan for the future that Bitcoin and Monero and Zcash have, is a return to peer-to-peer, face-to-face transactions that build communities, that build economies without creating that liability of some super powerful person in the middle.

Gavigan: Or the rent extraction.

Valkenburgh: Or yeah.

Baldet: So Jack, how do we prove to people a negative that's kind of the value that this information was not disclosed? How did we make them feel that when they don't really feel their data being siphoned from them every day then?

Gavigan: So you point at incidents where security or privacy breaches have had consequences. The obvious one is that the last US election, you—

Baldet: I thought that it was totally fine. I read something it was actually, okay.

Gavigan: —you pointed things like the Equifax breach. You asked them whether they would like anybody, it would ask them whether they would like every bank in the world to publish every single transaction on to the internet, so that if I know your bank account number and I can go and look up all your financial activity? And finally, I point to legislation so in the EU there's the [GDPR](https://gdpr-info.eu/) which, you know, places, you know, it has been enacted to protect individuals privacy and in the US, I've got an example here, in front of me which I'm going to read out from the [Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act](https://www.ftc.gov/tips-advice/business-center/privacy-and-security/gramm-leach-bliley-act), and it says, "It is the policy of the Congress, that each financial institution has an affirmative and continuing obligation to respect the privacy of its customers and to protect the security and confidentiality of those customers non-public personal information". And in a world where, you know, centralized financial institutions in the form of companies and Banks are being replaced by decentralized financial software structures and networks, you know, I think that that still applies, and I think, you know, people who create these networks, whether it's us in the Monero and Zcash communities, whether it's, you know, Bitcoin, I know that Vitalik's been talking recently ways of adding privacy to Ethereum, or indeed, you know, Facebook with Libra, I think we all have a responsibility to protect our users' privacy.

Baldet: It's such a wonderful note to kind of come and conclude on and I can say that, you know, it's a complete coincidence that Zcon and MoneroKon happen to fall over the exact same days but it is good to know that there is this fundamental base of things that we all seem to really agree on and communicate with each other about. And so it's been a real pleasure both here and to speak with you virtually. So I'll let you wrap as well.

Sarang: Yeah, absolutely, I think what we're all trying to do even though it may be using different types of technology and different approaches is, I think goes towards the same goal of, you know, of financial privacy and everything that we've talked about that implies for society and for individuals. So huge thank you to all the panelists and to everyone who has participated in the audience's here, over in Croatia or watching online, this is great now if we can continue this kind of collaboration to, you know, spread the word about what we're doing and why it's important in the future, so thanks to everyone.

[Applause]