Surae: Right now I would like to invite needmoney90 from the Monero project to speak about moderating Monero “The centralization necessary to maintain a decentralized community” everybody give it up for Needmoney

Needmoney90:  Hello, thank you for coming to the Monero konferenco Oh my name is Doug as some of you might know me by the handle needmoney90 on reddit and other places. I moderate a lot of places in the Monero community IRC, reddit, I started the XMRtrader room way back when which is how I got my start, I saw a need I filled it and there's a bit of a story about that later on I saw a need I filled it and there's a bit there's a bit of a story about that later on 

	So we'll start off with my slides. They're not up at the moment... perfect, good timing alright, So who runs monero? Ah There's the core developers and the developers in general, the community and the long-standing members who have a very surprising Amount of pull if you have somebody who's been around for a year or two and they express an opinion that oh, hey I don't really like the direction that you're going here. It gets taken into into account. That enters people's minds and they do think about it the Monero Research Lab, they give a lot of guidance towards where we go with the project, they update our Code and Research papers so that they are actually in the current state of the art. The outreach so artists writers self-appointed speakers. So that would be people like fluffy (even though he isn’t in the core developer category) The miners though, we'll talk about that later, moderators and then of course our friends and other people that I'm not mentioning. So, why do we need moderation? Platforms that don't have moderation. Sorry platforms that don't have moderation tend to have difficulty with focus discussion.

	You can try and imagine holding Monero community meetings on 4chan, and you could probably see the issue For the most part there are very few un-moderated platforms. For obvious reasons, and every platform has its own set of moderators who have their own policies that they buy in state based on how they feel and the community (and this is the decentralized part) gets to choose which of those platforms that they actually get to communicate and participate in and so I don't think that That makes it not decentralized just because people are able to pick and choose the people who have to be controlling the platform to maintain the discussion. And discussion does tend to route around censorship So, where is the community we are the majority of the community is on IRC some of us have been moving to matrix.  Way back, there was a large push from the greater cryptio community to move to slack this is about two years back every single ICO and Coin out there had a slack and if you wanted to get any sort of attention Or conversation, those people were not willing to go on IRC to chat with you. 

	So,  Later on we realized that slack had some significant problems with centralization, and we've moved to matter most both exists still there are relays between IRC and our other various rooms. Matter most is a slack clone, Except it's open source. Uh, Reddit is the main hub of our discussion r/Monero primarily and in order to keep conversation on topic and Monero, we have a number of tertiary subreddits that conversation gets moved to, so for example if you want to talk about memes and Monero is really awesome. And rah-rah-rah. You can go to moonero. If you want to talk about how terrible monero is and, you you just want to go and talk about how much you hate it. You can go to doomero, If you want to talk about trading, we don't want price talk or talk about I mean anything to do with markets on the main subreddit that's primarily for news and discussion of big events updates on community things. Of course there's github that's where our code is Mirrored it's primarily right now hosted on git lab, which is self hosted, again We like to move ourselves away from having centralized platforms be at the center of our operations There's the telegram logo unfortunately hadn't ever name there and of course stack exchange which is a place where programmers and coders and anybody who wants to go and get help in a technical sense go not to talk about things I'd say probably the most important things if you really want to get to the pulse of the community would be IRC and reddit, if you're looking to actually Understand technology. It would be Stack Exchange.

	So the moderation hierarchy. the best way that it could be described would be a series of benevolent dictators and, unfortunately, that's the way that the current platform set that we have available to us has set up the moderation rules. We don't particularly get a choice. This is just the way things are and the Policy is chosen by the head mod. However, the head mod gets to enact the rules that they think that  the community and the rest of the mods want so at least in r/Monero and most of our discussion avenues the head mod gets consensus from everybody and then decides on a course to take.

	 So thoughts on our discussion platforms r/monero is the most widely seen face of our community and it gets seen by everybody. So the moderation there is actually significantly more tolerant of people who are Undesirables on other platforms just because we I Mean, it's almost like freedom of speech and government people don't really have another place that they can go to air grievances, so it's kind of important that that remains a relatively uncensored discussion place. So one thing to note no moderator in our ecosystem gets paid, all of us do this by volunteer work because we actually think that this is a cause that's that's worth putting your time into I believe that good rules lead to a productive discussion and they don't stifle it, if you have rules that are causing Regular members to stop commenting for a fear of breaking the rules, you've probably done something wrong in That calls for re-evaluation. And of course, this is the big one that a lot of people don't get, activity for activities sake is an extremely tempting thing to do Everybody wants to have a subreddit has you know 30, 50 posts a day so Unfortunately what we could get there we could have meme posts in art and everybody's saying oh wow, Monero is really awesome! Unfortunately that just adds noise So there's a number of policies that the subreddit has instated that have been controversial to parts of the community because they don't understand the purpose of them and they see a lack of five of threads on reddit or a lack of comments as being indicative of a lack of activity when in reality, I think that it's uh,  It actually shows how much activity we have I mean if you go to the subreddit pretty much every threads is is relevant And that's that's fairly significant. I don't know if you've ever been to r/bitcoin recently But I don't think you could say that for the past couple years.

	 So, how do you become a mod? You offer assistance to the platforms that already exist if you have a problem with the state of their moderation, if you see lots of spam posts and you're constantly commenting on them or pinging the mods, that's definitely the chance to get into the position because obviously they're not doing the job as fast as you are, Like you're you're the obvious candidate the people who just seek power for powers sake without Realizing how they're able to help in the first place tend to be pretty bad at moderating. The second way to do it is to recognize a need that's currently not filled by the community and Then actually just going and creating a platform that fills it if other people agree with it they'll join it. And if they like your moderation, they'll stay, and of course making a platform is not a guarantee that you'll be able to retain power for that kind of discussion section and I have a story about that, in the early days of Monero there was a subreddit called Monero markets. There's a Bitcoin subreddit called Bitcoin markets that it was riffing off of and it was it had a head mod. I'm not going to give a name right now, it doesn't particularly matter, he had been inactive for three months nobody commented on the subreddit I just started making daily threads so that people could comment on price action because we didn't want price threads in our Monero I wasn't a mod at this point. I was just a user seeing a need and Eventually, one of the other moderators promoted me so that I could sticky posts this went on for a couple months Monero's price rose and the old head moderator came back from his hiatus and added a new moderator, and the two active moderators at that point on monero markets myself and another user I asked him. Hey, what's going on? You didn't contact us you added him and he basically thumbed his nose at us and said this is my subreddit, you don't get to tell me what to do, and we were taken aback because Monero is extremely collaborative, like that's that's not really the way that we want one of our community subreddits to be run, and note at this time monero markets was linked on r/Monero, it was linked in various places around our ecosystem, as the place to go if you wanted to have market discussion.

	 I Left the moderation post at monero markets and created my own subreddit, r/xmrtrader and effectively the community followed me there, they did they did not agree with the moderation policies of the person that was moderating Monero markets. And you can go to that subreddit. It's dead now. 

	So yeah Right now I'll talk about a couple current issues that I'm grappling with in my own day-to-day life with moderation Perhaps you can give me some insights, the first one would be CCS and donation posts. We have a wonderful crowdfunding system, unfortunately that system has a centralized governance structure that gets to decide who gets moved to the funding needed section. We have other people who post hey, I want a donation to do this on the r/monero subreddit, those two are very very close together asking for a donation to do something and asking for a donation on the CCS Feel very very close to me. We wanted to, and still have some issues with people asking for donations on the subreddit, without having gone through a vetting process but unfortunately that vetting process is an inherently part of our moderation hierarchy instruction that exists right now, and it turns it into something that's a bit more centralized than we're comfortable with. So we haven't done anything yet, and we're currently on the fence to where we want to go. But that's up in the air

	 The second one is karma limits for posting. I'm not sure if you're aware, but Basically every cryptocurrency subreddit around because this is literally money. There's a financial incentive are plagued by spammers and people who create new accounts just to go and posts advertisements for the latest new thing r/monero for the longest time did not have karma limits. If you had an account on reddit you could post on our Monero unfortunately, as the ecosystem has grown and the number of posts is grown We could we could grow the moderation team and that's definitely on the table but we decided to add a zero karma limit if you're below zero karma and People have decided to downvote your posts more than they upvote them, you you get a message that your message was from auto-mod that your comment was filtered. We're currently deciding if we want to go the route that other subreddits do and in institute things like 5 or 10 karma limits, but for right now for the most part new accounts can comment And then of course XMR trader for altcoin talk. I run XMRtrader one of the very interesting things about how the dynamic of the subreddits goes is on r/monero you can talk about altcoins, but you can't talk about the price, on XMRtrader you can talk about the price, but you can't talk about altcoins, and the question is well, why can't I talk about altcoins? Well because you're in Monero subreddits, but there's a lot of monero people who want to talk about all coins and say things like Oh Z Cash's price went down and Monero’s price went up, therefore. I mean there's some correlation there and It gets very difficult to draw the line between what's a legitimate post and whats somebody advertising, and I at least initially had a blunt rule that just said if you talk about all coins, your post is removed, later that was walked back to an altcoin Saturday thread. So every Saturday there's a thread that comes up and people can talk about all coins and solicit the views of the Monero community, and talk about price which isn't allowed on r/monero.

	 I Recently created this a discussion thread for the community to actually talk about whether they wanted to allow light altcoin discussion,  so say maybe top 20 by market cap. We still haven't determined. They are a reasonable filter at this point but it's currently under discussion to allow it in other other forums, but that's that's another thing that's on my plate, and I believe that's it. There's just gonna be a copyright.. oh closing thoughts. Perfect. Moderating a community that leans as heavily libertarian and our Anarcho-capitalist as the Monero community does is extremely difficult and has been a huge learning experience. I Found that a light touch is usually best whenever possible, good moderators tend to use their words first and their mod tools' is a last resort, and you have to know the taking action builds resentment, it's easy to go and hit the remove or the ban button dealing with the followed is very difficult a lot of people are willing to wield the power without actually taking responsibility for it afterwards and that's a very difficult thing. 

	Anyways, that's about it for my talk. If anybody has any questions on Monero’s moderation I'm here for the rest of the evening.
 
Surae: Let’s thank needmoney again, and let's actually… but we have questions and ones right here

Audience member:  Thank you really cool talk, that's on right? And thanks for your service as a moderator. You've been a good one, it's good to know that we can we have someone in there we can trust. Do you, like in your experiences do you think that you've been able to distill any notion of a bad actor? And what would constitute a bad actor or is there any such a thing? 

Needmoney90: Only by gut feeling. Unfortunately, if I was to try and create any rigorous definition for it, there's always something that would slip through, we have to take it on a case-by-case basis 

Needmoney90: Okay, thank you... 

Surae: Actually don't walk away yet. I have a quick question for you. Yeah, so you mentioned that already that basically it comes down to gut instinct and trying to manage the blowback versus…

Needmoney90: After you have a gut feeling about something at the talk to the person and just actually have a dialogue and very quickly you can figure out whether they're willing to listen or whether they're just going to talk past you and I mean if they're talking past you and it's very obvious you can tell what's going on. 

Surae: Honestly, I'm extremely grateful personally on a couple of levels for having needmoney in the community moderating the way that he does he does a fantastic job, and I want to thank him again.
