Money at the Edge: How People Stay Afloat in Venezuela — 
Jamaal Montasser, Open Money Initiative
http://youtu.be/wtbg1BD8ppM

Transcript:

Presenter: Our final presenter for this session is going to be Jamal Montasser from the open money initiative.  He's going to be talking to us about money at the edge.  Welcome!

Jamal: (takes some time setting up mic/computer *talking to offstage* Can you guys switch the spotter back to my slides...?  Because I can't actually click...It's on there...perfect.)

Beautiful, thank you.  Great, so, my name is Jamal, I'm one of the three co-founders of the open money initiative and I'm going to be talking to you about money on the edge, so designing for extremes in Venezuela, and just some quick background before I get started... Venezuela is a socialist petro-state, and in the midst of one of the largest economic crisis in the world. They're estimated to have about ten million percent inflation and to put a brass tacks on that, when it was estimated to be a million percent inflation...if you had put a million US dollars into bolivar in 2013 and tried to pull it out today, you would have less than a dollar.  I dunno what the math is for ten million percent inflation...but before I talk about the research that we did overseas, I want to share a little bit of background on myself and how I came to approach problems the way we did for this research project.  I'm a designer and an engineer...and I spent the early part of my engineering career and engineering studies actually working in international development.  And, so I spent a lot of time overseas and, you know, with great aspirations of helping other people...but quickly realized that often new technology in isolation made in say, a research lab, or...me thinking it up in Canada where I was from...often has a ton of implementation challenges in the field.  And so you can imagine say coming up with a new type of filter for water would be a great idea...but for people who have been living in a small village and who have been drinking that water for all of their life...they may not even realize that that water is making them sick.  And so they may not even care to switch because it doesn't make sense...and they may not even understand that there's small little microbes or things in the water that they can't see that are making them sick.  And so not only that, there were questions of access, so if this well is built in say, a chief's yard, they can gate who can access it.  So what is the process for designing, you know where it gets built?  There're questions of ownership. If I come and build a well...what happens when it breaks?  And what do people...local people think when it breaks...?  And, so I want to zoom forward to this last year when my co founders and I were wondering this question.  How might we find ways to make cryptocurrency useful to people in closed economies and collapsing monetary systems?  And the better question which we ended up asking because you never wanna approach a problem especially for a context which you don't know, with the solution [already] in mind... was how might we serve people in closed economies and collapsing monetary systems, right?  We didn't have the cultural context, the social fabric context, the systemic context, and so we wanted to approach the problem humbly.  And before we get into the research I wanna give you a quick overview of sort of our approach, so we used something called human centered design, ... After my, the early part of my career working in international development, I was drawn to design, went to graduate school and became a designer and this basically means that we put people at the center of our process.  Understanding not just how someone would fill out a survey and say, "do you like Monero or bitcoin...yes or no?" but, what are people doing, and why are they doing it?  What are their attitudes, their behaviors...what are they inclined to do, and not do.  What do their peers think of what they're doing?  And so our process was very much design research it wasn't academic research in the sense of you know you can ask me how many people are using cryptocurrency in the field... I have no idea.  What we did was research where we were interested in extremes.  So often research is thought to be at the middle of the bell curve...you're looking for a mean...we're on the edges.  We're looking for outliers, people who...have found a way to hack the system...or to thrive or survive...while the system is collapsing around them.  So what does that actually look like?  That includes ethnographic interviews...so we spent quite a bit of time in...Colombia, on the border in cucuta...it was a little bit too dangerous for us to go to Venezuela, so we did quite a bit of remote interviews.  These ethnographic interviews are about two hours long, and we often like to do them in context so where people live or where they work to understand sort of their life in more of a deep way.  We did a bunch of diary studies...these are longitudinal studies over 7 days when we had people report in...how are they using money?  What are they buying?  What kind of financial challenges are they facing?  Just to understand, you know, outside of an interview that is two hours, we want to understand what is happening in people's lives over time.  And the last part of our study was two displacements.  And these basically mean, they're kind of interesting experiments where you're trying to displace incumbent behavior for your participants.  So we did two of them, one of them we tried to use bitcoin as a currency to pay for all goods that someone was gonna buy that week, which we know is not...is not very conducive, right?  So that was displacement 1...and then displacement 2 we...worked with a money changer to try and convert the back end of their business...the liquidity pool that had for...sending money between the US, Colombia and Venezuela...we tried to convert the US dollar liquidity pool...to bitcoin, to see if that would make the business run better.  

After all that research, we did synthesis, which...this is a little taste of the hours and hours and weeks of, of writing quotes down, observations, and trying to understand what we're seeing from the field.  So, let's let's take you to Venezuela.  So this is a video from march 2019...of a lineup.  And this is extraordinarily typical in Venezuela where there are extreme shortages of all kinds of products, everything from foodstuffs to feminine hygiene products to toilet paper... but this line in particular is a lineup to a bank.  To get cash.  To get bolivar.  And the line keeps going...and going...and this is very typical.  So after I got back from our research overseas... I would get this question from people or...or for maybe this conference, the more appropriate question would be why don't they use Monero?  And...the reality is that...on the ground...no one wants the bolivar.  Everyone understands that it's like melting ice.  The value of your money is disappearing...daily.  A million percent inflation is very quick.  But the bolivar is extraordinarily undesirable...but it's the official money of commerce.  So it's government mandated, right?  So merchants...merchants might do their back end accounting...in another currency, like US dollars, or bitcoin...um...but they have to list prices in bolivar.  To be compliant with the law.  And furthermore...the country is extraordinarily gated in access to other financial jurisdictions or other currencies.  And I mean that quite literally.  There's no way to send money in or out of the country.  There's not even a western union...in Venezuela.  So the bolivar...depreciates by the hour, and it creates this extremely high time preference for when you're holding it.  So if you're...a money changer...this means that if you get bolivar, you want to offload those right away.  And if you're holding another currency...or another asset...you want sorta the just in time manufacturing approach of I'm just gonna convert exactly what I need, when I need it, so I'm not holding bolivar.  But that is far and few; people who actually have access to other assets...

For example, this is actually...we met a woman named Anna Maria.  We've changed all the names of the people we've met...we don't put photos of people we've met...but she's an engineering student, in the capital city of Venezuela...and she's one of the few bitcoin users or cryptocurrency users at all that we've met in our process...uh research process I think she, so she learned about bitcoin from her boyfriend...who was also sorta a nerdy engineer and...they used localbitcoins to convert to bolivar when they need local cash.  So if she's going to the movies, she'll convert just the amount she'll need for the movies...and the miners that they run are actually enough to support her whole family now.  So the economy has largely collapsed in Venezuela...and jobs... despite having a job, you know we met everyone from professors to transportation professionals...those salaries aren't adjusted for inflation.  So often you're doing side jobs and things like that to get enough money.  But understanding this context of ok so why don't they just use cryptocurrency? Why don't they just use another currency? Well it's because it's actually the bolivar is needed to pay for things...which begs the question of how might we increase local liquidity and elevate the safety and ease of tapping into it?  So often as a product designer... I'm thinking about solutions and services...but designing say like a cryptocurrency wallet to work on old android phones isn't necessarily going to help someone, right?  It's like, you need to design different mechanisms for on and off ramps...or cash in cash out, and knowing that, means the design solution, the product...is going to be very different than just this isolated wallet on a phone...you have to design for the context.  Another thing that we learned was that in the field was that multiple mediums and currencies created a barter like system.  So people obviously don't want money for money's sake, and because there's this gated access, people have access to different um bank accounts overseas, some people might have a euro account, some people might have a US dollar account...people might have US dollar cash in Venezuela.  And because of the extreme scarcity of products...if you are a product seller and you have the luck to have something like a, a medication...you get to choose how you get paid.  Which means that even if you had say...US dollars cash, or US dollars bank account...but the seller wants...euro, or wants a Zelle US dollar transfer but you only have US dollar cash...you cannot get it.  And this is exemplified by Julio who we met who finally found his mom's I believe it was Parkinson's medication and...he found it through a whatsapp or Instagram group...Instagram story and...this seller would only accept a Zelle transfer, and he didn't have a Zelle transfer... US dollar bank account to initiate this transfer, so he ended up using his uncle's.  But this is sorta the system that's in place where it starts to feel like barter because it's not just about the currency it's also about the medium.  We also had a participant who in our displacement where we were having people just spend bitcoin, they were wondering if localbitcoins was the same bitcoin that the merchant would take...because they're so used to having say, three prices for bolivar.  One for credit card, one for cash, one for bank transfer.  They're all different.  And so there's almost like this spider diagram that people use to assess the different currencies and mediums...so on the left side you have a twenty dollar bill, which is actually more valuable than a hundred dollar bill.  Because if you try to spend with a $100 bill, it's going to be very hard to get change.  So how might we increase the interoperability, or the ability of sellers to accept payments that they find less desirable?  So how do we create the system where it doesn't feel like barter, and people can say start to use Monero in the field and not have to worry about finding a seller who will take it?  Another thing that we found in the field is that people you know, certainly people are struggling, there're shortages of food, and all kinds of products...but the restaurants are full.  And so there's almost like two Venezuelas.  The one where people are comfortable and thriving, and then the other where people are struggling and with extreme scarcity and so elite members of society, rich members of society have these cocoons where they've built where they often have these social clubs where they'll pay a membership fee, and they're surrounded by other wealthy people who also have access to foreign bank accounts, they've been able to preserve their wealth and their customers for their businesses and their safe places to socialize.  We met a fella named Guillermo who is actually minting money off the hyperinflation.  So he will take a loan in bolivar...buy a place in New York...and when the loan comes due, you know, it worth something like a couple percentage points of what the original value of the loan is.  But for the banks who are getting repaid...their books are in bolivar.  So they've been repaid, they're fine.  And this is sort of part of the government facade you know that everything is okay.  

Another thing that we've found is that most transactions are kind of forced to feel like drug deals.  So with a lot of the socialist laws in place... Like price fixing for example, a lot of producers in... for example we met a fella named Anton, who's a farmer, coffee farmer, and the government has mandated coffee prices for raw produce and that price is below the cost of production.  And so certainly he wants to sell above the cost of production to stay in business and to also have enough to feed his family.  And there's also capital and forex controls...so converting your money from the bolivar...is also illegal, so if you're going to do that to survive...it's also going to move to the black market, or underground.  And then there's product quotas.  There's product quotas... In an extremely scarce environment, if you find a product that is valuable for you or your family...of course you're going to buy it up and give it to your family...but that's also illegal, so it's also going to be done underground in the black market.  You know even sending money right there's there's no official way to send money in or out of Venezuela.  If you look at this diagram... I put Canada and the US on the left side because I'm Canadian.  If I wanted to send money from my bank account to Jerry, so the big circles are kind of the country financial system, the small circles are the banks... I want to send money from my bank account to Jerry's, I would initiate a wire transfer.  Simple.  Say I'm in Venezuela and I'm trying to get money out to my US bank account... I have to find someone, this is a hoella system, it's called the hoella system if you've heard of it... I have to find someone who happens to have a bank account in Venezuela...and the US...and I give them my Venezuelan money and then the ball's in their court and hopefully they're going to fulfill their end of the deal, and they will initiate a transfer from their USD account to the final USD account destination of my choosing.  And that's.and this is highly illegal in pretty much every country, because to the government, it looks like money has never left the country.  But this is what people are doing to survive...we even met a woman Loraina, who...just like so many people about five million people have left Venezuela left for jobs, for money to support her family to support her family which she left in Venezuela, and she showed us how she would hide money in her hair.  Because the border guards would confiscate that money.  She would hide money in her shoe.  She would even convert some of her money into gold...and wore it across the border, because she thought the guards would think she was too poor to afford real gold.  We also learned that networks of trusted people have replaced the role of companies and institutions.  So as the economy has crumbled and the government sort of shutters...the availability of basic resources and services through traditional commerce channels and government channels has drastically diminished.  And so to fill the gap there are these emergent dynamic networks...digital networks often...where people sort of look to products, look to find products or to sell products, and so I have two pictures here of someone using a whatsapp status... I didn't even know whatsapp had a status function.  It's just kind of like Instagram stories and people will become part of say a group of their high school alumni...or college alumni...or some other association...and that trusted group is where people will post like "hey I've got milk powder for sale...or I have a $20 bill for sale...or I'm looking to offload this amount of bolivar for $100..." that's where commerce is happening now, and it's through these trusted channels. So often in this world of digital currency we're often saying you know cryptocurrencies make it so there's no need for trust...but the reality is that trust is needed more than ever in Venezuela.  Everyone who's using bitcoin has learned about it through friends that they trust or has used localbitcoins which enables people to trust people they don't know with an escrow system and a rating system...so the question really is how might we elevate confidence and trust in new financial products and tools?  And I often hear the word "trustless" and I understand as a technologist where that comes from and why it's important.but we really do need to elevate trust, and we need to start talking about confidence in these human elements in the field, so I wanted to finish here where I sort of started.  Where you know we so badly want to believe often that a few lines of code can solve really complex and human problems but it's often just one part of a system that needs to be designed for.  And so with that I want to say thank you and open up to questions.  

Presentation ends.

Q: So recently localbitcoins got rid of all cash in person transactions on their website...so how do you see that affecting Venezuela and do you see it more going to these sorts of trust networks overall sort of taking a majority of it or do you see something else coming up that we don't know about?  

A. Yep that's a great question...so localbitcoins in Venezuela is largely used not in person.  I've never heard of it being used in person.  So in Venezuela largely transactions are done by bank transfer.  Because they you know, cash as much as it's extraordinarily devalued...it's also super scarce.  It's very hard to get.  And you'd probably need like a wheelbarrow of bills to pay for something small.  So everything's done by bank transfer.  And so someone's using localbitcoins in Venezuela often what they'll do is they'll just go online and look for someone who has great rating of you know close to 100% thumbs up and then also has a lot of transactions and the transaction will be done completely digitally.  

Q: What's the best way that we can support your work?

A: The best way for now is honestly just to follow us on twitter.  We're a super early org I mean we founded our org in the fall of 2018...and started the project in January.  And so this is sort of like the we're doing the conference circuit and starting to write about our research results and shared them with our clients...but we're not sure what goes on from here so the best thing to do is to follow us on twitter for now.  Yeah.  

Q: what kind of open money initiative mission (inaudible)

A: We basically conduct applied research on collapsing economies in closed...or collapsing monetary systems in closed economies.  So that's kind of our first, that is our first take on our mission statement.  This project actually came about almost before the open money initiative was formed...so I met my two co founders are Jill Carlson and Alejandro Muchato which some of you may know or may heard of...we all met on twitter, and we came in to the idea which is from where I work which is a global design firm...and sort of came up with this project and OMI was sort of the wrapper of "how do we make this something that we think is important and people take seriously and..." so we're early and growing...hopefully that... does that answer your question?  

Presenter: Alright actually nice to finally hear the third member, I've heard Alejandro and Joe on plenty of podcasts, so thanks for coming out and chatting with us... the two use cases that I tell people typically when it comes to cryptocurrency is for markets with hyperinflation and for business cases in continents like Africa where you have SMS text messaging for how people transact money.  So...given that you've done a deep dive into Venezuela and the hyperinflation issues there... Are there potential studies or projects that you're going to be looking into African countries and particularly how bitcoin and cryptocurrency and privacy focused coins can benefit their business to business transactions as well?  Or are you gonna be really kinda like...toeing the Venezuela line moving forward?

A For now we're focused on this project.  We'd certainly love to explore other countries and other places of human centered design research...but for now this is our focus.  

Q: You spoke a lot about your project which was very interesting and very impressive...so if you could just kind of sum up... What...are there any like key improvements that ...people or you know that are just kind of low hanging fruit that are out there that can help increase adoption or improve the lives of those in Venezuela?

A: So there's a couple things that come to mind.  I'm kind of trying to think in this context of you know Monero cryptocurrency...and...honestly local liquidity is probably the most important thing.  So when I think about some of the people I met... Bitcoin or Monero or any cryptocurrency I say bitcoin because it's the one that most people in the field knew?  There was actually almost no other awareness of other cryptocurrencies besides the petro...which is the government's you know scammy cryptocurrency...without local liquidity...it becomes another financial silo, right?  And that's kind of what a lot of people are battling against, is they have... they're financially siloed in cash or their bank account in Venezuela, or they have money in the US that's like hard to bring over borders...and what's really special about localbitcoins is that it has localized liquidity.  And so the reason I think that's so key is because if you're trying to onboard people into new digital finance products, or cloud banking, if we can even call it that...people have to feel the tangibility of it very quickly.  They have to be able to use it and know that it's real...or it's just some...you know...some ephemeral digital currency when people have been used to this cash that they can spend anywhere...we have to have a way to make it for people who plug into a cryptocurrency to be able to use it very quickly...and to me the bridge is local liquidity.  So thinking outside of sort of the core things that I presented what is most useful, I really think local liquidity.  If I could dress as Steve Ballmer and be sweaty and instead of yelling developers developers, I would be yelling liquidity liquidity.

Presenter: Alright, so I think that's all...

Jamal: Thank you. 